Title: Open-World Video Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15632v2

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 00:42:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 65

Markdown Content:
# Open-World Video Segmentation 

Qing Su 1, Kaiyang Li 1, Yuan Zhuang 1, Fei Miao 1, Shihao Ji 11University of Connecticut While video segmentation has advanced rapidly on short clips and closed-set benchmarks, open-world video segmentation remains largely unexplored. The challenge is twofold: (1) existing methods are not de-signed to support object discovery and identity maintenance in long videos of dynamic ego-motion, and (2) existing evaluation protocols rely on a rigid 1:1 matching that unfairly penalizes semantically valid predic-tions with mismatched granularity. To address both gaps, we introduce Savvy , a practical and strong system for zero-shot open-world long-horizon video segmentation. Savvy combines hierarchical mask discovery ,

deferred admission , and track consolidation to support persistent object discovery, safe track promotion, and stable long-range identity maintenance. We further propose OGA , a granularity-aware evaluation suite for open-world video segmentation. Built on a Granularity-Agnostic (GA) matching protocol, OGA relaxes conventional 1:1 matching to an n:1 mapping, but still enforces temporal rigor by detecting support discon-tinuities through sever points and scoring each reference object through its dominant coherent fragment. This prevents fragmented or flickering support from being over-rewarded while enabling GA-adapted met-rics and structural diagnostics: identity persistence (IP), and identity concentration (IC). On VIPSeg, we show that standard 1:1 evaluation substantially underestimates open-world methods, whereas GA evaluation recovers much of their suppressed performance. On the more realistic long-horizon benchmarks: ScanNet and HM3D, Savvy consistently outperforms strong baselines across both classical and proposed metrics, including STQ, VPQ ∞, IP and IC. Together, these results establish a practical benchmark and a strong base-line for open-world long-horizon video segmentation. We provide the project page and source code links above. 

Correspondence: qing.2.su@uconn.edu 

Project: Available at https://qingsuml.github.io/savvy/ 

Code: Available at https://github.com/QingSuML/savvy 

# 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in foundation models [10, 14, 16] have made open-world video segmentation (OVS ) increasingly feasible, shifting video understanding beyond narrowly defined, closed-set benchmarks towards more realistic de-ployment settings. In OVS, the object set is not predefined: new entities may emerge throughout a video, and semantic boundaries need not align with a fixed category ontology. These challenges are especially pronounced in long indoor exploratory videos with dynamic ego-motion and repeated revisits over extended temporal gaps. As shown in Figure 1, such videos require managing not only an expanding set of seen objects, but also a growing number of reappearance events . We contrast VIPSeg [12] with ScanNet [5], a scene-centric indoor video benchmark with substantially stronger viewpoint change and object re-observation. Both accumulated object count and reap-pearance burden grow over time, with markedly stronger trends in ScanNet than in VIPSeg. This highlights that OVS is not merely a matter of propagating a fixed object set, but of supporting discovery and identity maintenance over time, particularly in long and dynamic real-world videos. Despite rapid progress in segmentation and tracking, this setting remains largely under-explored. Existing video segmentation pipelines are primarily designed for initialized objects, short-horizon propagation, or semantically aligned benchmarks. Among the few frameworks applicable to OVS, DEVA [3] supports flexible integration of exter-nal segmentors with a memory-based propagation backbone [2], but its new-object admission is greedy, relying on overlap between propagated masks and segmenter predictions without an explicit verification stage. EntitySAM [19], by contrast, builds on SAM2 [16] with DINOv2 [14]-conditioned prompt refinement and a parallel decoder, yet its abil-ity to discover genuinely new objects over time remains limited, largely arising only when existing prompts drift onto unseen entities. Its COCO-based pretraining further aligns prediction granularity with the target benchmark, VIPSeg. Consequently, current methods either lack robust mechanisms for persistent open-world discovery or benefit from 1                                            

> arXiv:2606.15632v2 [cs.CV] 17 Jun 2026 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Normalized Time (t/T)
> Accumulated  Events
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 0
> Accumulated  # of  Events  / # of  Seen  Objects
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Normalized Time (t/T)
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 0
> Accumulated  # of  Events  / # of  Seen  Objects
> Normalized Time (t/T)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 0
> Accumulated  Num.  of  Distinct  Objects
> Normalized Time (t/T)
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 0
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Figure 1 Open-world video dynamics. 1: average accumulated number of seen objects over normalized video time. 2: average accumulated reappearance events normalized by the number of seen objects. ScanNet exhibits substantially heavier object accumulation and reappearance than VIPSeg. 3 & 4: on ScanNet, average object discovery and normalized re-association of reappearing objects for Savvy, DEVA+SAM, and EntitySAM, against the GT trends. Together, these plots highlight the need for persistent object discovery and long-range identity re-association. Savvy tracks the GT trend much more closely than existing baselines. 

benchmark-aligned granularity rather than stable object discovery and identity maintenance. A key structural reason is that OVS requires more than strong per-frame masks or local propagation. It requires explicit decisions about when a region should be admitted as a new object candidate, how that candidate should be validated, and how overlapping, conflict, or semantically related tracks should be consolidated. Many existing pipelines [1, 4, 11, 13, 18, 20] rely on frame-wise argmax arbitration over mask logits to derive the segmentation map. While effective in shorter or ontology-aligned settings, this strategy becomes brittle in long-horizon open-world videos: it prematurely collapses ambiguous hypotheses into hard assignments, entangles candidate discovery with track ownership. The modeling challenge is compounded by an evaluation gap. Standard metrics, such as STQ [17] and VPQ [9], are built on rigid 1:1 matching between predictions and ground truths in closed-set benchmarks, where predic-tion granularity is expected to align with annotation. This becomes restrictive in the open-world setting, where valid predictions may correspond to a different structurally meaningful decomposition of an object. Enforcing 1:1 

matching hence systematically underestimates open-world methods under granularity mismatch. The result is a circular dependency: the setting lacks both a practical model and a fair evaluation protocol, blocking progress on both fronts. We break this deadlock by addressing modeling and evaluation jointly. We introduce Savvy , the first practical system for open-world long-horizon video segmentation . Savvy is organized around the lifecycle of object masks: (1) hierarchical mask discovery , which periodically proposes candidate objects by consolidating multi-granularity segmentation outputs; (2) deferred admission , implemented through a transient buffer that filters short-lived noise and premature duplicate discoveries before promotion; and (3) track consolidation , which stabilizes the active track set through self-consistency filtering, track conflict resolution, and part-whole absorption. Together, these components enable persistent object discovery, safer track promotion, and stable long-range identity maintenance. We further introduce OGA , a granularity-aware evaluation suite for open-world video segmentation . At its core is a 

Granularity-Agnostic (GA) matching protocol that relaxes conventional 1:1 evaluation to an n:1 mapping, allowing multiple predictions to jointly support a reference instance under granularity mismatch. OGA adapts classical met-rics such as STQ and VPQ to the open-world setting and augments them with structural diagnostics that measure identity persistence and concentration. This yields a more faithful evaluation framework for OVS than standard closed-set metrics alone. We validate the framework in three stages. We first use VIPSeg [12] as a controlled testbed to expose the limita-tions of standard 1:1 evaluation for zero-shot open-world methods. We show that GA evaluation recovers much of the suppressed performance of the methods without benchmark-aligned granularity, while narrowing the apparent advantage of aligned baselines such as EntitySAM [19]. We then evaluate on the more realistic long-horizon bench-marks ScanNet [5] and HM3D [15], where Savvy consistently outperforms strong baselines on both classical and proposed metrics, especially those sensitive to long-horizon consistency and identity structure. Finally, we support both pillars of the framework through Savvy ablations and controlled OVS stress tests with synthetic failure modes. 2Unexplained     

> Explained
> SAM
> Small
> medium
> large
> Frame
> Merge
> Candidate
> masks Point
> prompts Multi -level
> proposals
> Transient buffer
> · · · · · ·
> · · · · · ·
> · · ·
> · · ·
> Discard
> Persistent track Promote
> Merge
> Unstable/short -lived

1. Appearance -Consistency Gating   

> X’s appearance bank
> span 1span 2span 3
> Xre -appearance
> Similarity
> Gating  Continual
> tracking
> Suppression

2. Competition Arbitration 3. Part -whole Absorption              

> Consistency
> Quality
> Gating
> Track Y
> Track XXwins
> Track Y
> Track X
> Geometry -
> based
> Gating
> Savvy Hierarchical Mask Discovery (HMD) Deferred Admission (DA)
> Track Consolidation (TC)
> Repeated match
> SAM
> Hierarchical Mask
> Discovery (HMD)
> Track
> Consolidation
> (TC)
> Transient
> Buffering  (T B)

SAM2 

> Candidate  masks

Figure 2 Overview of Savvy. Savvy addresses open-world video segmentation through three core components: Hierarchical Mask Discovery (HMD) uses a SAM-based image segmenter to generate multi-level proposals in unexplained regions and merges them into candidate masks; Deferred Admission (DA) only promotes persistent candidates while merging repeated matches and discarding weak short-lived ones; and Track Consolidation (TC) regularizes the active track set through appearance-consistency gating, competition arbitration, and part-whole absorption. In our experiments, SAM2 serves as the propagation backbone. 

# 2 Related Work 

Video Segmentation and Long-Term Propagation. A major line of work in video object segmentation (VOS) focuses on propagating initialized object masks over time. Memory-based methods such as STM [13], AOT [18], XMem [2], and Cutie [4] progressively improve space-time matching, multi-object association, and long-term memory, but remain largely confined to the semi-supervised VOS regime, where the object set is fixed at initialization. DEVA [3] takes a step toward open-world operation by decoupling image-level segmentation from temporal propagation. How-ever, because discovery and maintenance remain separated, object admission is still handled through frame-wise association heuristics rather than explicit object-state validation and consolidation, which can lead to fragmented identities and weak long-range consistency in open-world videos. 

Open-World and Foundation-Model-Based Segmentation. Foundation models have substantially expanded video segmentation beyond category-closed or manually initialized settings. Promptable models such as SAM [10] and SAM2 [16] make zero-shot segmentation increasingly feasible by enabling strong class-agnostic mask generation and propagation. However, they remain fundamentally prompt-driven, and do not by themselves provide a mech-anism for continuous discovery, validation, and maintenance of a growing set of open-world objects throughout a video. EntitySAM [19], one of the closest baselines to our setting, builds on SAM2 with DINOv2 [14]-conditioned prompt refinement and a parallel decoder. While this strengthens propagation under its intended regime, its ability to discover genuinely new objects over time remains limited, and its COCO-based pretraining induces a prediction granularity substantially aligned with benchmark annotations such as VIPSeg [12]. In contrast, our goal is to build a practical system for persistent open-world video segmentation, with repeated discovery, deferred candidate val-idation, and stable object-set maintenance over time. 

Evaluation for Open-World Video Segmentation. Evaluation in video segmentation has largely been shaped by metrics such as STQ [17] and VPQ [9], which assess spatial quality and temporal association and are well suited to standard benchmarks. However, these metrics assume a rigid 1:1 correspondence between predictions and reference objects. While appropriate when semantic granularity is aligned, this assumption becomes restrictive in the open-world setting, where semantically valid predictions may not follow the annotation’s preferred partition. Consequently, strict 1:1 matching can conflate granularity mismatch with genuine segmentation or tracking failure. Our proposed OGA evaluation suite addresses this gap through a Granularity-Agnostic (GA) matching protocol that relaxes rigid 1:1 matching to an n:1 mapping. 30 48 96 144 192 240 288 338 386 434 482 530 578               

> Frames GT Savvy DEVA EntitySAM
> 0120 237 357 474 594 714 831 951 1068 1188 1305 1425
> Frames GT Savvy DEVA EntitySAM
> ScanNet 0019_00
> HM3D 00800 -TEEsavR23oF_y002

Figure 3 Qualitative comparison on long-horizon ScanNet and HM3D sequences. Savvy preserves a more stable and coherent object set across repeated re-observation, maintaining persistent identities for furniture, scene structures, and other indoor objects over long temporal gaps. DEVA+SAM shows frequent ID drift and unstable support, while EntitySAM produces a sub-stantially coarser decomposition with limited object discovery. These examples illustrate the practical differences behind the quantitative gains in long-horizon fidelity and identity stability. 

# 3 Methodology 

# 3.1 Savvy: A Framework for OVS 

Overview. Savvy ( Segment Any Video and e Ver Ything) treats OVS as the problem of maintaining an explicit object set over time, rather than deriving segmentation purely from frame-wise mask arbitration. This design exposes control points for object discovery, deferred admission, identity persistence, and conflict resolution, treating these lifecycle decisions as first-class components of OVS rather than incidental post-processing heuristics. Savvy is built on three components: (a) Hierarchical Mask Discovery , which proposes candidate objects in unexplained regions; (b) Deferred Admission , which validates discoveries before promotion; and (c) Track Consolidation , which regularizes the active object set through self-consistency filtering, conflict resolution, and part-whole absorption. 

Definition 1 (Open-World Video Segmentation, OVS). The goal of OVS is to produce temporally consistent per-frame object segmentation without assuming that a full object set is known in advance. New objects may become visible at arbitrary times, previously observed objects may disappear and later reappear, and the system must therefore maintain and update its object identities as the scene evolves. 

(a) Hierarchical Mask Discovery (HMD). Savvy treats object discovery in OVS as a selective proposal problem rather than unrestricted frame-wise segmentation. New candidates should arise only from regions unexplained by the cur-rent track set, and they should be consolidated across multiple granularities before being considered for tracking. Accordingly, Savvy performs hierarchical mask discovery: at selected frames, it queries an image segmenter ( e.g. ,SAM) on unexplained regions, collects mask proposals at multiple granularities, and merges them into a cleaner 4Reference object                  

> Assigned supports
> Frame tFrame t+1Frame t+2Frame kFrame k+ 1
> Sever
> Fragment
> [t, ... ,k ]
> Continual support
> Local support

. . . Figure 4 Illustration of sever determination. Under GA matching, a reference object may be supported by different prediction subsets over time. The sever ratio ρt measures how much support is retained by the same predictions across adjacent states (continual support , blue) relative to the total support active in either state ( local support , gray). High ρt indicates continued support and keeps the current fragment intact; low ρt indicates that support has been largely replaced, inducing a sever. Sever points partition the support chain into temporal fragments, from which the dominant fragment is selected for scoring. 

candidate set hierarchically. Concretely, proposals from finer and coarser levels are merged through survival-based competition, so that fragile fragments that do not retain sufficient support are suppressed. This reduces rediscovery of existing objects, suppresses brittle fragments, and preserves object hypotheses at semantically different scales. The resulting masks are passed forward as candidate discoveries rather than immediately registered tracks. 

(b) Deferred Admission (DA). Savvy treats object admission in OVS as a deferred decision rather than an immedi-ate consequence of discovery. Newly discovered masks may reflect genuine new objects, but they may also arise from clutter, partial visibility, or duplicate views of already tracked entities. To separate these cases, Savvy places every new discovery into a transient buffer before assigning it a persistent identity. Within this buffer, candidates accumulate short-term evidence over time. Repeated agreement with an established object indicates redundant rediscovery and triggers discard or merge, whereas sustained visibility and consistency support promotion into the active track set. This design prevents greedy track creation, suppresses short-lived noise, and makes object registration contingent on temporal evidence rather than a single-frame proposal. 

(c) Track Consolidation (TC). Over time, duplicate identities may accumulate, reappearing objects may drift from their historical representations, and part- and whole-level tracks may coexist redundantly. Savvy addresses these failure modes through track consolidation , which continually regularizes the active object set rather than relying on propagation alone. Track consolidation has three components. (i) Appearance-based self-consistency gating 

modulates track continuation when the current observation deviates substantially from the track’s accumulated appearance history. (ii) Competition arbitration suppresses unstable duplicates when multiple established tracks compete for the same region, favoring tracks with stronger consistency and longer temporal support. (iii) Part-whole absorption resolves part-whole redundancy by absorbing previously tracked parts into a newly stabilized whole when the latter subsumes them, and vice versa when an existing whole subsumes a newly stabilized part. Together, these operations keep the active object set compact, temporally coherent, and less sensitive to redundancy or decomposition drift. To remain practical on long videos, Savvy incorporates lightweight memory pruning and active-track control to prevent unbounded growth of the object set. The appendix expands each component of this pipeline: hierarchical discovery in Appendix A.2, deferred admission in Appendix A.3, track consolidation in Appendix A.4, memory and active-track control in Appendix A.5, and implementation hyperparameters in Appendix A.6. 

# 3.2 OGA: Open-world Granularity-Agnostic Evaluation 

Granularity mismatch in evaluation. In open-world video segmentation, a valid prediction need not share the semantic granularity of the reference annotation. This calls for an evaluation protocol that tolerates granularity mismatch by treating the annotation as a reference decomposition rather than a uniquely ideal semantic ground truth. Our proposed OGA framework addresses this through a Granularity-Agnostic (GA) matching protocol, which relaxes standard 1:1 evaluation to an n:1 mapping and underlies the metrics introduced below. 5Definition 2 (GA Matching). Let G denote the set of reference instances and P the set of predicted instances over a video. Under GA matching , each prediction p ∈ P may support at most one reference instance 

g ∈ G , while multiple predictions may jointly support the same reference instance. Matching is therefore GT-referenced and n:1 .

GA Matching. Let g ∈ G denote a reference instance and p ∈ P a predicted instance, both treated as spatiotemporal 

tubes over an evaluation window. Thus, |p ∩ g| denotes tube intersection over the evaluation window, while |pt ∩

gt| denotes spatial intersection at frame t. Classical VOS metrics rely on symmetric tube-level IoU and rigid 1:1 

correspondence, which becomes overly restrictive when a reference object is validly supported by one or more coherent part-level predictions. OGA instead uses the asymmetric prediction support ratio S(p, g ) = |p ∩ g|/|p|,and defines the valid support set 

V(p) = {g ∈ G | IoU( p, g ) ≥ τiou or S(p, g ) ≥ τs} . (1) With p left unmatched if V(p) = ∅, the final GA assignment is then 

a(p) = arg max  

> g∈V (p)

S(p, g ). (2) 

Granularity-Aware STQ and VPQ. Once GA matching is established, each reference instance g is associated with a set of assigned predictions P(g) = {p ∈ P | a(p) = g}. In the n:1 setting, support for g is therefore no longer a single prediction tube, but a time-varying set of assigned predictions. For each frame t where g is present, we define g’s active support set and support mass as 

At(g) = {p ∈ P (g) | | pt ∩ gt| > 0}, Mt(g) = ∑ 

> p∈At(g)

|pt ∩ gt|, (3) which together form the support chain C(g) = {(t, A t(g), M t(g)) }.

As illustrated in Figure 4, a central difficulty is that, under n:1 association, a reference instance may be supported by different prediction subsets across disconnected periods. Ideally, one would select the most coherent subset that maximizes sustained support over time, but this is combinatorial and therefore expensive and impractical for evaluation. To approximate this virtual tube, OGA instead identifies support discontinuities explicitly through a 

sever ratio between consecutive support-chain states, 

ρt(g) = 

∑

> p∈At(g)∩At+1 (g)

(|pt ∩ gt| + |pt+1 ∩ gt+1 |)∑

> p∈At(g)∪At+1 (g)

(|pt ∩ gt| + |pt+1 ∩ gt+1 |) . (4) This ratio measures how much of the support remains carried by the same predictions across adjacent states, relative to the total support active in either state. High ρt(g) indicates continued support, while low ρt(g) indicates that support has been largely replaced, signaling a temporal break. A sever is declared when ρt(g)<τ sev , which partitions the support chain C(g) into temporal fragments. Rather than searching for an optimal subset globally, OGA emphasizes continued support of g over a long horizon. We therefore adopt a dominant fragment surrogate: among all sever-induced fragments, we retain the one with the largest accumulated support mass, 

F ⋆(g) = arg max  

> F∈Π( g)

∑ 

> (t,A t(g),M t(g)) ∈F

Mt(g), (5) where Π( g) denotes the set of fragments induced by sever points. Classical STQ and VPQ are then adapted by scoring each reference instance against the virtual tube induced by its dominant fragment F ⋆. In other words, only the prediction subset and time-span selected by the dominant frag-ment are credited towards the final overlap and matching. This preserves the spatiotemporal property of classical metrics, enforcing continued support while preventing fragmented or flickering support from being over-rewarded under n:1 association. Appendix B.2 gives the complete GA matching construction, Appendix B.3 and Appendix B.4 derive the resulting 1:1 -to-n:1 generalizations of STQ and VPQ, and Appendix B.5 details dominant-fragment selec-tion. 6Structural Diagnostics. Under rigid 1:1 matching, many structural failure modes are implicitly collapsed into the primary score. Under GA matching, this is no longer the case: once support is allowed to be n:1 , it becomes nec-essary to distinguish whether a score is achieved through persistent identity maintenance or through fragmented many-to-one support. OGA therefore augments GA-adapted STQ and VPQ with two complementary structural diag-nostics from mass and graph perspectives: identity persistence (IP) and identity concentration (IC). 

Identity persistence quantifies whether support remains dominated by the same identity over time. For each pre-diction p ∈ P and reference instance g ∈ G , we define 

IP P(p) = max g∈G |p ∩ g||p| , IP G(g) = max p∈P |p ∩ g||g| . (6) Averaging over predictions and references yields the dataset-level scores IP(P) and IP(G) . High IP(P) indicates that a prediction remains attached to one dominant reference, while high IP(G) indicates that a reference object is carried primarily by one dominant prediction. 

Identity concentration quantifies whether support is structurally compact or dispersed. It is defined from the sequence-level GA validity graph. Let p ⇝ g denote that prediction p and reference instance g ever form a valid relaxed match at some frame under the GA criterion. We define 

Gval (p) = {g ∈ G | p ⇝ g}, Pval (g) = {p ∈ P | p ⇝ g}. (7) The prediction- and reference-side concentration scores can then be expressed as 

IC G(g) = 



1

|P val (g)| , |P val (g)| > 0,

0, otherwise, 

IC P(p) = 



1

|G val (p)| , |G val (p)| > 0,

0, otherwise. (8) High IC(G) indicates that a reference object is validly supported by only a small number of predictions, and vice versa for IC(P) with respect to references. In practice, [IP(P) , IP(G) ] and [IC(P) , IC(G) ] should be interpreted in tandem, as they provide complementary prediction-side and reference-side views of persistence and structural concentration. 

# 4 Experiments 

# 4.1 Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate on three datasets with complementary roles. VIPSeg [12] serves as a controlled testbed for exposing metric failures under granularity mismatch. ScanNet [5] provides a realistic OVS benchmark with long indoor scene-centric videos, repeated object re-observation, and strong viewpoint change. HM3D [15] (HM3D-Sem v0.2) complements ScanNet with substantially more complete reconstruction and richer semantics, making it a better test of generalization to embodied-AI environments. We construct and release an HM3D-106 trajectory-composition benchmark with long-horizon room scans and adjacent-region revisits as part of OGA. All evaluations follow the class-agnostic OGA setting. 

Baselines. We compare Savvy against the few baselines that are practical and directly usable in online or semi-online , video-only open-world settings. DEVA+SAM (semi-online) [3] provides a decoupled discover-and-propagate baseline, while EntitySAM [19] is a SAM2-backboned, DINOv2-based prompt-refinement framework with benchmark-aligned granularity. On VIPSeg, we additionally report SAM2 [16] as a control model without mid-video object dis-covery. 

Evaluation protocol. We compare standard rigid 1:1 evaluation against our Granularity-Agnostic (GA) protocol to directly expose the effect of granularity mismatch. On ScanNet and HM3D, we report GA-adapted primary scores, including STQ and VPQ , together with structural diagnostics such as IP(P/G) and IC(P/G) . The appendix provides the exact evaluation recipe: dataset construction and preprocessing in Appendix C, class-agnostic conversion and void handling in Appendix C.4 and Appendix C.5, metric hyperparameters in Appendix B.12, structural diagnostics in Appendix B.7, and additional temporal diagnostics in Appendix B.11. 

Implementation details. Savvy is implemented as a semi-online OVS framework with SAM2 as the video propa-gation backbone and a SAM -based image-level discovery module adapted to produce multi-level mask proposals. Appendix A.6 summarizes the system hyperparameters, and Appendix B.12 lists the metric thresholds used by OGA. Unless otherwise stated, the same evaluation pipeline is applied across all methods under the corresponding pro-tocol. All experiments are performed on NVIDIA A6000. 7Table 1 OGA results on VIPSeg. Standard rigid 1:1 evaluation is compared against our n:1 GA protocol. Methods without benchmark-aligned granularity recover the most under GA evaluation. Appendix E.1 reports the full VIPSeg table and discussion, while Appendix D analyzes why rigid matching and class-agnostic evaluation alone are insufficient. 

Method Eval VPQ ∞ SQ RQ STQ AQ IoU / GQ 

EntitySAM [19] 1:1 54.68 84.68 64.57 43.67 42.92 44.42 

n:1 59.23 (+4.55) 84.50 (-0.18) 69.52 (+4.95) 65.13 (+21.46) 49.70 (+6.78) 88.43 (+44.01) SAM2 [16] 1:1 24.92 81.85 30.45 37.23 37.52 36.94 

n:1 51.76 (+26.84) 85.40 (+3.55) 60.09 (+29.64) 60.91 (+23.68) 51.21 (+13.69) 74.62 (+37.68) DEVA+SAM [3] 1:1 28.52 83.44 34.18 44.85 46.08 43.66 

n:1 53.05 (+24.53) 82.18 (-1.26) 63.04 (+28.86) 68.24 (+23.39) 54.91 (+8.83) 86.59 (+42.93) 

Savvy (Ours) 1:1 26.15 83.38 31.35 46.29 48.42 44.26 

n:1 55.35 (+29.18) 82.50 (-0.88) 66.43 (+35.08) 72.09 (+25.80) 59.01 (+10.59) 89.53 (+45.27)   

> Table 2 OGA results on ScanNet and HM3D. Primary OVS fidelity metrics are reported together with structural diagnostics for identity persistence ( IP ) and identity concentration ( IC ). Appendix E.2 and Appendix E.3 provide the complete fidelity, diagnostic, and size-stratified results for each benchmark.

Baseline Fidelity ↑ Persistence (IP) ↑ Concentration (IC) ↑

Method VPQ ∞ VPQ 0 STQ AQ GQ IP P IP G IC P IC G

EntitySAM 10.82 32.31 17.65 6.27 61.61 24.93 17.31 9.02 19.19 DEVA+SAM 18.53 43.58 43.15 20.35 95.87 63.21 50.38 54.82 25.90 

> ScanNet

Savvy (Ours) 28.63 58.48 53.93 32.59 91.11 75.44 57.92 62.68 32.03 

EntitySAM 1.46 14.97 5.97 0.74 64.37 8.36 5.80 14.46 15.06 DEVA+SAM 8.47 30.41 25.26 6.94 94.81 35.55 26.11 74.56 26.57 

> HM3D

Savvy (Ours) 19.59 46.77 35.69 14.28 91.26 53.15 37.07 74.46 32.16 

# 4.2 VIPSeg as a Testbed for Granularity-Agnostic Evaluation 

We use VIPSeg [12] as an in-the-wild short-video testbed for OVS to expose the current evaluation issue: class-agnostic evaluation alone is not sufficient . Even after semantic labels are removed, standard metrics still assume that predictions and annotations share the same semantic granularity, and hence systematically favor methods with benchmark-aligned predictions. Table 1 compares our n:1 Granularity-Agnostic ( GA ) protocol against standard 1:1 evaluation on VIPSeg. All methods improve under GA evaluation, confirming that rigid 1:1 matching penalizes valid support with mismatched granu-larity. Methods without pre-aligned granularity (SAM2, DEVA+SAM, and Savvy) recover the most. Notably, Savvy improves from 26.15 to 55.35 on VPQ ∞ and from 46.29 to 72.09 on STQ . Conversely, EntitySAM benefits markedly less, reflecting its benchmark-aligned prediction granularity. This alignment confers a dual advantage: it yields direct support under 1:1 matching, and it produces fewer, coarser masks conducive to better spatiotemporal co-herence. As GA lifts the penalty on unaligned methods, this apparent performance gap narrows substantially. These results show that the central fairness issue in open-world evaluation is not merely semantic classification, but 

granularity mismatch . Once this is handled explicitly, the contrast between metrics becomes more informative: a method with higher VPQ but lower STQ /AQ may still benefit from benchmark-aligned, coarser mask decomposition for stronger local support, while remaining weaker in persistent association. Savvy, by contrast, achieves the best 

STQ and AQ , indicating that its recovered support is more coherent over time. This revealed distinction motivates extending OGA evaluation to more realistic, long-horizon open-world videos. 

# 4.3 Evaluation on Realistic OVS Benchmarks 

Table 2 reports results on ScanNet and HM3D , two realistic long-horizon benchmarks for OVS. Savvy achieves the strongest overall performance, obtaining the best VPQ ∞ and STQ on both datasets and exceeding DEVA+SAM by over 50% on VPQ ∞. The structural diagnostics further show that Savvy achieves the strongest identity persistence 

and strongest reference-side identity concentration , indicating a more persistent and compact support structure. On ScanNet , Savvy reaches 75.44/57.92 on IP P /IP G and 62.68/32.03 on IC P /IC G; on HM3D , Savvy reaches 53.15/37.07 on IP P /IP G and 74.46/32.16 on IC P /IC G, respectively. Corroborated with the qualitative results in Figure 3, Savvy 8Table 3 Ablation study of Savvy. We factor Savvy into three operational choices: whether discovery relies on hierarchical mask discovery (HMD) or raw AMG , whether new objects are admitted immediately ( Imm. Adm. ) or through transient buffering (Trans. Buf.), and whether track consolidation is enabled. The full design achieves the best long-horizon performance, yielding the strongest VPQ ∞, STQ, AQ, and IC G.AMG HMD Imm. Adm. Trans. Buf. Track Cons. VPQ ∞ ↑ VPQ 0 ↑ STQ ↑ AQ ↑ IC P ↑ IC G ↑

✓ ✓ ✓ 31.31 58.53 56.02 34.93 61.16 31.51 

✓ ✓ 30.13 58.56 55.44 34.44 58.15 29.50 

✓ ✓ 28.07 59.20 55.99 34.91 58.50 28.45 

✓ ✓ 25.42 58.84 55.66 34.48 62.15 24.89 

manages a discovered object set more coherently over time. EntitySAM, despite its strong VPQ/RQ on VIPSeg, falls well behind on both realistic benchmarks, confirming that benchmark alignment does not translate to robust long-horizon open-world behavior. DEVA+SAM achieves the highest GQ on both datasets yet remains weaker on primary fidelity and reference-side identity metrics. Strong instantaneous geometry is therefore insufficient for OVS; the main difficulty lies in maintaining stable identities and sustained support over a long horizon. Beyond accuracy, long-horizon OVS must remain computationally tractable as the active object set grows. Profiling the full Savvy pipeline on ScanNet shows a final mean cumulative throughput of 7.4 FPS on an NVIDIA A6000, with GPU memory bounded at roughly 6–7 GB; Appendix A.7 provides the complete per-scene runtime, memory, and active-mask traces. Taken together, these results establish Savvy as the strongest practical baseline on realistic OVS benchmarks and show that the advantage suggested on VIPSeg under GA evaluation carries over decisively to the long-horizon set-ting. Appendix C.2 and Appendix C.3 describe the ScanNet and HM3D evaluation construction, Appendix E.2 and Appendix E.3 report the complete benchmark results, and Appendix E.4 checks HM3D sensitivity to semantic versus instance annotation granularity. 

# 4.4 Ablation Study of Savvy 

We ablate Savvy through three operational choices: hierarchical mask discovery (HMD) versus raw AMG , immediate admission versus transient buffering , and whether track consolidation is enabled. As shown in Table 3, the full design achieves the best long-horizon performance, with the strongest VPQ ∞, STQ , AQ , and IC(G) .

Track consolidation improves long-range consistency by regularizing the active object set, increasing VPQ ∞ from 30.13 to 31.31 and IC(G) from 29.50 to 31.51. Transient buffering complements this by favoring more persistent ad-missions over greedier short-term growth: replacing immediate admission with buffering lowers VPQ 0 slightly, but substantially improves VPQ ∞ from 28.07 to 31.31 and IC(G) from 28.45 to 31.51. Finally, HMD provides more struc-tured discoveries than raw AMG (the default Automatic Mask Generator in SAM), improving VPQ ∞ from 25.42 to 31.31 and IC(G) from 24.89 to 31.51, even though raw AMG yields a slightly higher IC(P) . This reflects prediction-side purity without GT-side compactness: many short-lived fragments can remain locally pure while still shattering the refer-ence decomposition. HMD is therefore essential for sustaining compact and persistent support on the reference side. Overall, the ablations support Savvy’s design philosophy: track consolidation stabilizes the active set, transient buffering improves admission quality, and HMD supplies structured discoveries that remain useful over a long horizon. Appendix E.5 extends this analysis with parameter sweeps for discovery stride, transient-buffer length, competition margin, and appearance self-consistency threshold. 

# 4.5 Stress Testing OGA with Synthetic Failure Modes 

We stress-test OGA using controlled perturbations that target distinct failure modes: clutter (uniform dilation into competing regions), dropout (intermittent support removal), flicker (high-frequency ID pollution), sever (low-frequency but permanent ID mutation), and void (dilation only into void regions). Figure 5 shows that OGA responds selectively to these degradations rather than collapsing them into a single overlap loss signal. The patterns are consistent with the intended semantics of the diagnostics. Clutter causes a gradual joint decline across fidelity, per-sistence, and concentration, while dropout sharply degrades VPQ ∞ and STQ , indicating loss of valid support. By contrast, flicker and sever most strongly affect the GT-side terms, especially IC G, confirming that OGA distinguishes 9Figure 5 Stress testing OGA under synthetic failure modes. OGA responds selectively to these perturbations: overlap-based fidelity drops strongly under dropout; GT-side concentration is especially sensitive to flicker and sever; and void expansion leaves the metrics nearly unchanged. Thus, OGA distinguishes different structural failure modes rather than merely tracking aggregate overlap loss. 

fragmented many-to-one support and temporal identity breakage from mere overlap degradation. Prediction-side scores such as IP P and IC P can remain high under these perturbations, since many short-lived fragments may each stay locally pure; they are therefore more meaningful when read together with the GT-side diagnostics. Overall, these stress tests show that OGA is not merely a relaxed matching rule, but a diagnostic evaluation frame-work whose components respond differently to distinct structural failure modes. 

System robustness. Appendix F gives the full stress-test protocol and per-perturbation results, while Appendix E.5 reports Savvy parameter sweeps and OGA threshold sensitivity. Together, these additional studies show that the gains are not driven by brittle system or metric hyperparameters. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We presented a joint step toward practical and fair open-world video segmentation. On the modeling side, we introduced Savvy , a long-horizon OVS framework built around structured discovery, deferred admission, and track consolidation. On the evaluation side, we introduced OGA , which relaxes rigid 1:1 matching through GA association and augments classical metrics with structural diagnostics. Together, they address a key circular dependency in this setting: without a practical system, realistic evaluation remains under-motivated, while without fair evaluation, gen-uine open-world behavior remains undervalued. Empirically, we showed that benchmark-aligned granularity can substantially inflate standard video segmentation scores, and that class-agnostic evaluation alone does not resolve this effect. On VIPSeg, OGA recovers much of the suppressed performance of methods without benchmark-aligned granularity. On the more realistic long-horizon benchmarks ScanNet and HM3D, Savvy achieves the strongest overall performance, with clear advantages in long-horizon fidelity, structural concentration, and identity persistence. More broadly, we view this work as a foundational step for OVS, framing open-world video segmentation as the joint problem of persistent discovery, identity maintenance, and granularity-aware evaluation. We hope Savvy and OGA provide a more realistic and meaningful basis for future work in long-horizon open-world video understanding. 

Limitations and Broader Impact. Savvy remains class-agnostic rather than truly open-vocabulary. It is also a system-level framework and is not optimized for real-time inference. OGA anchors matching on the reference an-notation and relaxes granularity on the prediction side; we view this as the most practical choice under granularity mismatch, though richer benchmarks may enable broader protocols in the future. More realistic open-world video segmentation may benefit robotics and embodied AI, but stronger long-horizon visual tracking may also increase monitoring capacity. Hence, deployment should consider privacy, consent, and context-appropriate use. 10 References 

[1] Bowen Cheng, Anwesa Choudhuri, Ishan Misra, Alexander Kirillov, Rohit Girdhar, and Alexander G Schwing. Mask2former for video instance segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10764 , 2021. 2 [2] Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G Schwing. Xmem: Long-term video object segmentation with an atkinson-shiffrin memory model. In European conference on computer vision , pages 640–658. Springer, 2022. 1, 3 [3] Ho Kei Cheng, Seoung Wug Oh, Brian Price, Alexander Schwing, and Joon-Young Lee. Tracking anything with decoupled video segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 1316–1326, 2023. 1, 3, 7, 8 [4] Ho Kei Cheng, Seoung Wug Oh, Brian Price, Joon-Young Lee, and Alexander Schwing. Putting the object back into video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3151– 3161, 2024. 2, 3 [5] Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5828–5839, 2017. 1, 2, 7 [6] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. The epic-kitchens dataset: Collection, challenges and baselines. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00343 , 2020. 63 [7] Mohammed El-Kebir and Gunnar W Klau. Solving the maximum-weight connected subgraph problem to optimality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.5308 , 2014. 30 [8] Samir Khuller. Approximation algorithms for finding highly connected subgraphs. 1998. 30 [9] Dahun Kim, Sanghyun Woo, Joon-Young Lee, and In So Kweon. Video panoptic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9859–9868, 2020. 2, 3 [10] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 4015–4026, 2023. 1, 3 [11] Xiangtai Li, Wenwei Zhang, Jiangmiao Pang, Kai Chen, Guangliang Cheng, Yunhai Tong, and Chen Change Loy. Video k-net: A simple, strong, and unified baseline for video segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18847–18857, 2022. 2 [12] Jiaxu Miao, Xiaohan Wang, Yu Wu, Wei Li, Xu Zhang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. Large-scale video panoptic segmentation in the wild: A benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21033–21043, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 [13] Seoung Wug Oh, Joon-Young Lee, Ning Xu, and Seon Joo Kim. Video object segmentation using space-time memory networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 9226–9235, 2019. 2, 3 [14] Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. 1, 3 [15] Santhosh K Ramakrishnan, Aaron Gokaslan, Erik Wijmans, Oleksandr Maksymets, Alex Clegg, John Turner, Eric Undersander, Wojciech Galuba, Andrew Westbury, Angel X Chang, et al. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000 large-scale 3d envi-ronments for embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08238 , 2021. 2, 7 [16] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. 1, 3, 7, 8 [17] Mark Weber, Jun Xie, Maxwell Collins, Yukun Zhu, Paul Voigtlaender, Hartwig Adam, Bradley Green, Andreas Geiger, Bastian Leibe, Daniel Cremers, et al. Step: Segmenting and tracking every pixel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11859 , 2021. 2, 3 [18] Zongxin Yang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. Associating objects with transformers for video object segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:2491–2502, 2021. 2, 3 [19] Mingqiao Ye, Seoung Wug Oh, Lei Ke, and Joon-Young Lee. Entitysam: Segment everything in video. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 24234–24243, 2025. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 

11 [20] Qihang Yu, Ju He, Xueqing Deng, Xiaohui Shen, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Convolutions die hard: Open-vocabulary segmentation with single frozen convolutional clip. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:32215–32234, 2023. 2 

12 Appendix 

# Contents 

A Details of Savvy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 A.1 Pipeline overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

A.2 Hierarchical mask discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

A.3 Deferred admission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

A.6 Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

A.7 Runtime and memory profiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

B Details of OGA Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 B.2 Granularity-agnostic matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

B.3 GA-adapted STQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

B.4 GA-adapted VPQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

B.12 Evaluation hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 

C Dataset and Evaluation Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 C.1 VIPSeg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 

C.2 ScanNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 

C.3 HM3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 

C.5 Void and ignore-region handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 

D Analysis of Granularity Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 D.1 Rigid matching failure cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 

E Additional Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 E.1 Full VIPSeg results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 

E.2 Full ScanNet results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

E.3 Full HM3D results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

E.4 HM3D granularity robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 

E.5 Additional ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 

F Synthetic Stress-Test Protocol and Results . . . . . . . . . 46 G OGA Visualization Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 G.1 Support matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 

H Additional Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 H.1 Long-horizon examples and failure analysis . . . . 59 

I Out-of-Domain Stress Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 

13 A Details of Savvy 

# A.1 Pipeline Overview 

Savvy ( Segment Any Video and e Ver Ything) is implemented as a semi-online object-set maintenance pipeline. Rather than producing each frame by a single feed-forward segmentation pass, Savvy maintains an explicit set of object tracks and repeatedly updates this set as the video evolves. Each object has a persistent identity, a prop-agation state maintained by the SAM2 video predictor, an appearance record consisting of an active descriptor and a historical appearance bank, and a lifecycle status indicating whether it is still transient or has been promoted to an established track. We summarize the pipeline through four stages: propagate–verify–discover, deferred admission, track consolidation, and long-video system controls. 

Propagate–verify–discover. At initialization, Savvy bootstraps the object set either from external mask proposals or by querying the image-level discovery module on the first frame. Each initial mask is registered with the SAM2 video predictor as a new object, after which the system enters a propagate–verify–discover loop. Starting from the current frame, SAM2 propagates all active objects forward. For each propagated frame, Savvy stores the predicted masks, updates object presence and miss streaks, applies appearance consistency checks when objects reappear after long absences, resolves conflicts among overlapping established tracks, and periodically searches for new objects in regions not already explained by the active object set through the hierarchical mask discovery module A.2. 

Deferred admission. When new candidate masks are discovered, Savvy does not immediately treat them as per-manent objects. Instead, they are inserted as transient tracks. During a fixed deferred-admission window, each transient accumulates evidence of visibility and is repeatedly checked against established tracks. If it repeatedly agrees with an established object, it is treated as a duplicate rediscovery and merged or discarded. If it remains distinct and visible for enough frames, it is promoted to the established set. This deferred admission mechanism prevents a single noisy proposal from permanently expanding the object set. 

Track consolidation. Savvy further regularizes the established object set through track consolidation. First, appear-ance self-consistency gating compares a reappearing object’s current feature descriptor against its historical ap-pearance bank and suppresses inconsistent reappearances. Second, competition arbitration resolves high-overlap conflicts among established tracks by preferring the track with stronger appearance consistency, longer continu-ous support, and finally greater seniority. Third, part-whole absorption removes redundant part-level tracks when a newly stabilized whole object spatially subsumes them and when an existing whole subsumes a newly stabilized part. Together, these operations allow Savvy to maintain a compact and stable object set over long videos. 

Long-video system controls. For practicality on long-horizon videos, Savvy also includes active memory control. Old non-conditioning SAM2 outputs outside the memory attention window are pruned, stale prediction masks can be stripped from old frames, and an active-object limit prevents unbounded memory growth. When the active set exceeds this limit, historically small tracks are evicted first, and their recent masks are temporarily retained as suppression regions to avoid immediate rediscovery. These implementation choices make the pipeline robust to long videos where object discovery, disappearance, and reappearance occur repeatedly. 

# A.2 Hierarchical Mask Discovery 

Hierarchical Mask Discovery (HMD) is Savvy’s image-level discovery module. Its role is to periodically propose new object candidates in regions that are not already explained by the current object set. Instead of running an image segmenter over the full frame and directly registering all proposals, HMD follows a selective workflow: it first identifies unexplained regions, samples prompts only from those regions, generates multi-granularity SAM proposals, distills them through hierarchical mask merging, and finally passes only surviving candidates to deferred admission. 

Unexplained-region prompting. At a discovery frame, Savvy constructs an occupied-region mask from the cur-rent established tracks. In the default non-exploratory mode, transient tracks are also included so that recently discovered candidates are not immediately rediscovered. Recently evicted tracks can further be retained as tem-porary suppression regions. If the occupied mask covers almost the entire frame, discovery is skipped. Otherwise, HMD samples a regular grid of prompt points from the remaining unexplained region and queries the image-level segmenter only at those locations. 14 Multi-granularity SAM proposals. HMD uses an adapted SAM1 automatic mask generator. For each prompt point, SAM produces multiple candidate masks through its multimask output. Instead of flattening these outputs into a single proposal set, HMD keeps their scale structure and groups them into small-, medium-, and large-level proposal sets, denoted by MS, MM, and ML. Each proposal is filtered by SAM’s predicted IoU and stability score, and is assigned a quality score used for downstream competition. 

Hierarchical mask merging. The core of HMD is a survival-based merging operator. Given two proposal sets M1

and M2, let M = M1∪M 2 be the combined candidate set. Each mask mk ∈ M has binary support χk(x) ∈ { 0, 1}

and quality score qk. HMD assigns each pixel to the highest-quality proposal covering it: 

A(x) = arg max   

> k:mk∈M

qkχk(x), (9) with pixels not covered by any proposal assigned to background. After this winner-take-all arbitration, a proposal is retained only if it keeps enough of its original support. Let 

Ωk = {x | χk(x) = 1 },̂ Ωk = {x | A(x) = k}. (10) The retained area ratio is 

rk = |̂ Ωk||Ωk| . (11) Proposal mk survives if rk ≥ τsurv and |̂ Ωk| > 0; otherwise, its assigned pixels are released to background. This filtering suppresses unstable fragments that are almost entirely overwritten by stronger overlapping masks, while preserving proposals that retain sufficient unique support. HMD applies this operator recursively across proposal scales: 

MSM = Merge( MS, MM; τsurv ), (12) 

MHMD = Merge( MSM , ML; τsurv ). (13) The resulting MHMD defines the image-level candidate partition passed to Savvy’s deferred-admission stage. 

Mask quality score. For each SAM proposal, HMD uses a quality score that combines SAM’s predicted mask quality with a log-scaled area prior: 

qk = (1 + log(1 + |Ωk|)) ck, (14) where ck is SAM’s predicted IoU score and |Ωk| is the mask area. The logarithmic area term discourages small high-confidence texture fragments from dominating larger stable regions, while remaining sublinear so that large masks do not automatically suppress meaningful fine-scale proposals. In practice, this score is used in the pixel-level arbitration described above. 

Scale-dependent scoring. The hierarchical formulation also exposes a useful control point: different scale tran-sitions may use different reliability scores or survival thresholds. A flat merge over all small-, medium-, and large-level proposals would force a single arbitration rule across all granularities. In contrast, recursive merging allows the small-to-medium stage to be biased toward suppressing fragile fine-scale fragments, while the medium-to-large stage can emphasize confidence or semantic stability. In our default implementation, we use the same confidence-area quality score for simplicity, but the operator itself is not tied to this choice. 

Candidate survival against active tracks. The merged HMD proposals are not directly inserted into the persistent object set. Before admission, Savvy compares each candidate against the current propagated masks. Established tracks, transient tracks, and temporary suppression masks are treated as occupied regions. A candidate may keep only the part not already claimed by these masks, and it is retained only if the surviving region covers at least a fixed fraction of its original area. This second survival test prevents rediscovery of existing objects and ensures that HMD contributes genuinely new hypotheses. 15 Require: Frame It; established tracks Ot; transient tracks Tt; segmenter Φ; survival threshold τsurv 

Ensure: Candidate masks Ct 

> 1:

Construct occupied mask Ut from Ot, Tt, and temporary suppression masks  

> 2:

if Ut nearly covers the frame then  

> 3:

return ∅ 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

Sample prompt points Pt from unexplained region Ut 

> 6:

(MS, MM, ML) ← Φ( It, Pt) 

> 7:

MSM ← Merge( MS, MM; τsurv ) 

> 8:

MHMD ← Merge( MSM , ML; τsurv ) 

> 9:

Ct ← ∅  

> 10:

for m ∈ M HMD do  

> 11:

m′ ← m \ Ut 

> 12:

if |m′|/|m| ≥ τsurv and m′ passes geometric filters then  

> 13:

Ct ← C t ∪ { m′} 

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

return Ct 

> Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Mask Discovery

Additional filters. Savvy applies two lightweight geometric filters before inserting a discovered mask as a tran-sient track. First, sliver-like masks are removed using compactness and bounding-box aspect-ratio checks. Second, a border-delay rule suppresses masks whose centroid lies near the image boundary, where objects are often only partially visible and likely to produce unstable identities. Candidates that pass these checks are inserted as tran-sient tracks and must still pass deferred admission before becoming established objects. 

# A.3 Deferred Admission and Transient Buffering 

Open-world discovery is noisy: an image-level proposal may correspond to a genuinely new object, a transient frag-ment, a partially visible boundary object, or a duplicate view of an already tracked entity. Savvy therefore separates 

discovery from admission . New candidates produced by HMD are not immediately added to the established object set. Instead, they are first inserted as transient tracks and must pass a deferred-admission test before receiving permanent status. 

Transient track state. Each transient track stores a candidate identity, its entry frame, visibility evidence, maximum observed area, and duplicate-agreement statistics with established tracks. Let z denote a transient track. During its deferred-admission window, Savvy records 

v(z), amax (z), h(z), b(z), (15) where v(z) is the number of visible frames, amax (z) is the maximum mask area observed during the window, h(z)

is the number of repeated agreement hits with its best matched established object, and b(z) is the identity of that best matched established object if one exists. 

Duplicate agreement checking. At each frame, Savvy compares visible transient tracks against visible established tracks. For a transient z and established track o, agreement is measured by mask IoU: 

IoU t(z, o ) = |Mz,t ∩ Mo,t ||Mz,t ∪ Mo,t | . (16) If the best established match exceeds an agreement threshold, the transient records an agreement hit. Agreement must be repeated with the same established object to count as duplicate evidence. If a different established object becomes the best match, Savvy switches the stored match only when the new IoU is substantially stronger. This prevents unstable one-frame overlaps from prematurely merging a transient into the wrong established track. 16 Deferred-admission decision. Once the transient has remained in the buffer for B frames, Savvy resolves it using a three-way decision: 

z →



resolve as duplicate , if b(z)̸ = ∅ and h(z) ≥ τhit ,

promote , if v(z) ≥ τvis and amax (z) passes the size gate ,

discard , otherwise .

(17) The first case handles duplicate rediscovery: If a transient repeatedly agrees with the same established track, Savvy treats it as duplicate rediscovery and resolves it in favor of the established identity. In implementation, this res-olution explicitly merge the transient support into the established track when detected online. The second case handles genuine new objects: if the transient remains visible for enough frames and reaches sufficient spatial support, it is promoted to the established set. The final case removes short-lived fragments and weak proposals. 

Backfilling promoted tracks. When a transient is promoted, Savvy backfills its buffered masks into the final pre-diction sequence. This prevents the object from appearing only after the end of the deferred-admission window. In other words, the buffer delays the identity decision, not the temporal support credited to a valid object. If the tran-sient is instead merged into an established object, its buffered masks can be remapped to the established identity when they provide additional support. 

Why deferred admission is necessary. Immediate admission creates a permanent object identity from a single image-level proposal. In long videos, this causes rapid identity growth from clutter, partial views, and duplicate discoveries. Deferred admission turns object registration into an evidence-accumulation process: a candidate must either prove that it is persistent and distinct, or be absorbed into an existing object. This design is especially important in long-horizon OVS, where the number of potential proposals grows over time and greedy admission can lead to severe ID fragmentation. 

# A.4 Track Consolidation 

Deferred admission reduces noisy object creation, but long-horizon OVS still faces a second challenge: the estab-lished object set itself can become inconsistent over time. Reappearing objects may drift away from their historical appearance, multiple established tracks may compete for the same region, and part-level and whole-level tracks may coexist redundantly. Savvy addresses these issues through track consolidation , which continuously regularizes the active object set after tracks have been promoted. Track consolidation is applied to established tracks, rather than transient candidates. This distinction is important: deferred admission decides whether a new candidate deserves a persistent identity, while track consolidation de-cides whether existing persistent identities remain mutually consistent and useful. In Savvy, consolidation has three components. First, appearance self-consistency gating checks whether a reappearing object remains compatible with its own historical appearance record. Each established track maintains an appearance memory consisting of an active descriptor for the current visible period and a bank of committed descriptors from previous visible periods. When a track reappears after a long absence, its current descriptor is compared against this bank. If the similarity is too low, the reappearance is suppressed rather than accepted as a continuation of the same identity. Second, competition arbitration resolves high-overlap conflicts among established tracks. When two established masks substantially overlap in the same frame, Savvy treats this as a competition for ownership of the region. The winner is chosen by appearance self-consistency when available; if the scores are close, Savvy prefers the track with longer continuous support, and finally falls back to seniority. This prevents unstable duplicate tracks from repeatedly replacing older and more reliable identities. Third, part-whole absorption handles redundant decompositions across semantic granularity. When a newly stabi-lized whole track spatially subsumes existing part tracks, the part tracks are absorbed into the whole identity. The reverse case is also handled: when a newly discovered part-level candidate is already contained by an established whole, deferred admission resolves it in favor of the established whole rather than promoting it as a separate per-sistent identity. Together, these two directions prevent the active object set from accumulating redundant part and whole identities while preserving support already collected by the absorbed tracks. It is especially useful in 17 open-world segmentation, where image-level proposals may naturally appear at different semantic granularities over time. Together, these mechanisms make the established object set self-regularizing. Rather than relying on SAM2 prop-agation alone, Savvy continually checks whether object identities remain appearance-consistent, mutually non-redundant, and structurally compact. This is essential in long videos, where small local errors can otherwise accu-mulate into persistent ID duplication, drift, or fragmentation. 

A.4.1 Appearance Self-Consistency Gating 

Appearance self-consistency gating is designed to prevent long-gap identity drift. In long-horizon videos, an object may disappear for many frames and later reappear under a different viewpoint. A propagation backbone may also re-activate an object on an unrelated region with a plausible mask. Savvy therefore does not accept every reappearance purely from propagation. Instead, it checks whether the current observation is compatible with the track’s own historical appearance record. For each established object o, Savvy maintains an appearance memory bank. During a contiguous visible period, Savvy extracts a descriptor from the current mask region and updates an active exponential moving average (EMA). When the object becomes absent for a sufficiently long interval, the active EMA is committed to the object’s historical bank. Thus, the bank stores one descriptor per visible appearance period rather than one descriptor per frame, making it compact while still representing multiple past appearances. Given a mask Mo,t for object o at frame t, Savvy first computes a bounding box around the mask. The box is expanded for small and medium masks to include local context , while very large masks use the tight box to avoid turning the descriptor into a global scene representation. From the SAM2 image backbone, Savvy pools features from multiple FPN levels within this box and concatenates them into a descriptor: 

ϕo,t = Concat ℓ GAP (F ℓt

[Bℓ(Mo,t )]) , (18) where F ℓt is the ℓ-th backbone feature level at frame t, Bℓ(Mo,t ) is the mask bounding box mapped to that feature resolution, and GAP denotes global average pooling. Within a visible period, the active descriptor is updated by EMA: 

eo,t = αe o,t −1 + (1 − α)ϕo,t . (19) When the visible period ends, this descriptor is frozen and appended to the memory bank Bo. For a later reappear-ance, Savvy compares the current descriptor against the most compatible historical descriptor: 

s(o, t ) = max 

> e∈B o

cos ( ϕo,t , e ) . (20) If s(o, t ) < τ app , the current mask is suppressed and the object remains absent. Otherwise, the reappearance is accepted, the miss streak is reset, and the active EMA is updated with the current descriptor. This gating is applied only when an established track reappears after a long enough absence. It therefore does not over-constrain normal short-term propagation, where appearance may change smoothly from frame to frame. Instead, it targets the failure mode most harmful to long-horizon OVS: an old identity being incorrectly revived on a different object or background region after a long temporal gap. 

A.4.2 Competition Arbitration 

Even after deferred admission, established tracks may occasionally compete for the same image region. This can happen when two identities become redundant, when a previous object drifts into a nearby region, or when SAM2 propagation produces overlapping masks for objects with similar visual support. Savvy resolves these conflicts through competition arbitration, a frame-level suppression rule applied only among established tracks. For each frame t, let Ot denote the set of established tracks with non-empty masks. Savvy considers pairs of established tracks (oi, o j ) whose masks overlap substantially: 

IoU t(oi, o j ) = |Mi,t ∩ Mj,t ||Mi,t ∪ Mj,t | . (21) 18 If IoU t(oi, o j ) < τ comp , the two tracks are allowed to coexist. Otherwise, Savvy treats the pair as a competition for the same region and suppresses one of the two masks at frame t.Let si and sj denote the maximum cosine similarity between the current descriptor and the appearance bank of tracks oi and oj , respectively, and let ℓi and ℓj denote their continuous presence streaks. For a competing pair with 

IoU t(oi, o j ) ≥ τcomp , Savvy suppresses the secondary through 

L(oi, o j ) = 



arg min o∈{ oi,o j } so, if si, s j exist and |si − sj | ≥ δ, 

arg min o∈{ oi,o j } ℓo, if appearance is ambiguous and ℓi̸ = ℓj ,

arg max o∈{ oi,o j } id( o), otherwise .

(22) The first branch suppresses the track whose current observation is less consistent with its own appearance history. The second branch is used when appearance evidence is ambiguous and favors the track with longer recent con-tinuous support. The final branch is a seniority tie-breaker: older identities are preferred, which corresponds to suppressing the track with the larger object ID. This arbitration rule is intentionally conservative. It does not globally merge identities or permanently delete the losing track; instead, it suppresses the losing mask in the current frame and updates its miss streak. This allows a track to recover later if it becomes spatially separated and appearance-consistent again. Thus, competition arbitra-tion removes frame-level duplicate support without prematurely destroying potentially valid long-term identities. 

A.4.3 Part-Whole Absorption 

Open-world segmentation does not assume a single fixed semantic granularity. As a result, Savvy may encounter both part-level and whole-level hypotheses for the same physical entity. For example, a chair seat may be discov-ered before the full chair, or a cabinet door may be tracked before the entire cabinet becomes visible. Without additional consolidation, both tracks may remain active, causing redundant identities and unnecessary competi-tion. Savvy addresses this through part-whole absorption. Part-whole absorption handles two complementary cases. First, when a newly stabilized whole-level track spatially subsumes existing established part tracks, the contained parts are absorbed into the whole identity. Second, when a newly discovered part-level candidate is already contained within an established whole, deferred admission re-solves the candidate in favor of the established whole rather than promoting it as a separate persistent identity. Thus, both directions serve the same goal: preventing the active object set from accumulating redundant part and whole identities. For a newly promoted candidate ow and an established candidate part op, Savvy first applies lightweight geometry-based gates to rule out implausible part-whole pairs. These gates require the candidate whole to be sufficiently larger than the part and spatially compatible with it under bounding-box occupancy. Only pairs that pass these coarse checks are evaluated by pixel-level containment: 

IoS( op, o w) = |Mp,t ∩ Mw,t ||Mp,t | . (23) The established track op is considered a contained part of ow if 

IoS( op, o w) ≥ τcontain . (24) When this condition is satisfied, op is absorbed into ow: its stored masks are remapped into the whole identity, and the part identity is removed from the active object set. This operation is intentionally asymmetric. A part should be removed only when it is substantially contained by a larger, stabilized whole; mere overlap is insufficient. The coarse geometry gates prevent similarly sized or spa-tially disjoint objects from being collapsed, while the containment gate ensures that the smaller track is genuinely explained by the larger one. As a result, part-whole absorption reduces redundant identities without suppressing neighboring objects that happen to overlap under perspective projection. In implementation, containment is checked after promotion of a transient into an established track. If multiple contained parts are found, Savvy absorbs them sequentially across pipeline restarts to keep the SAM2 object state consistent. 19 A.5 Memory Management and Active-Track Control 

Long-horizon OVS requires maintaining an expanding object set over many frames. Without explicit control, the number of active tracks and stored propagation states can grow quickly, leading to excessive memory use and repeated rediscovery of weak objects. Savvy therefore includes lightweight memory management and active-track control mechanisms. These mechanisms are not part of the conceptual OVS objective, but are important for making the system practical on long videos. 

SAM2 memory pruning. Savvy uses SAM2 as the propagation backbone, whose memory attention only accesses a bounded temporal window during evaluation. Therefore, non-conditioning outputs that fall outside this effec-tive memory window are no longer useful for future propagation. Savvy periodically removes these stale non-conditioning outputs from the SAM2 inference state. In addition, old prediction masks can be stripped from stored frame outputs while preserving the memory features needed by the propagator. This substantially reduces memory usage without changing the forward propagation behavior. 

Active-track budget. Savvy also enforces a maximum number of active SAM2 objects. When the active object set exceeds this budget, the system removes low-priority tracks to avoid unbounded growth. Priority is estimated using each object’s maximum historical mask area rather than only its current area. This choice is important in egocentric or scene-centric videos: a real object may appear small at the current viewpoint but may have been large and reliable earlier. Using maximum historical area therefore protects stable objects that are temporarily far away, while preferentially pruning tracks that have remained small throughout their lifetime. 

Recent-eviction suppression. Naively removing a track can cause the discovery module to immediately rediscover the same region as a new object. To avoid this loop, Savvy keeps the last mask of a recently evicted track as a temporary suppression region for a short period. During HMD, these recent-eviction masks are included in the occupied-region mask, preventing the image segmenter from immediately proposing the same weak object again. This converts hard deletion into a short “cooldown” mechanism. 

Adaptive discovery density. Savvy optionally adapts the SAM grid density used by HMD. In cluttered scenes, dense prompting may produce excessive fragmented proposals, while in cleaner scenes a denser grid can improve dis-covery coverage. Savvy therefore tracks the recent number of generated masks and reduces the grid density when proposal counts become too high; it gradually restores the density when the scene becomes less cluttered. This feedback mechanism reduces mask explosions without disabling discovery altogether. 

Role in the overall pipeline. These controls are intentionally conservative. They do not redefine object identity or alter the evaluation target; instead, they keep the inference state bounded and prevent low-confidence discoveries from dominating computation. Together with deferred admission, memory pruning and active-track control allow Savvy to operate on long videos with repeated discovery, disappearance, and reappearance events. 

# A.6 Implementation Details and Hyperparameters 

Savvy is implemented as a semi-online pipeline built on a SAM2 video predictor for mask propagation and an adapted SAM1 automatic mask generator for image-level discovery. We use SAM1 ViT-H as the image-level discovery model and SAM2.1 Hiera-Large as the video propagation backbone. The SAM2 predictor maintains object-specific propagation states, while the SAM1-based discovery module is queried periodically to propose new candidate masks in unexplained regions. Unless otherwise stated, all methods are evaluated with the same output format and the same OGA evaluation pipeline. All experiments are performed on NVIDIA A6000 GPUs. We report detailed runtime and memory profiling in Sec. A.7. Savvy operates by repeatedly propagating the current active object set, resolving transient candidates, consolidat-ing established tracks, and injecting new discoveries at a fixed discovery stride. When a new object is inserted, removed, promoted, or absorbed, the propagation state is updated and the semi-online output prefix may be re-vised for buffered transient masks. This allows deferred admission to delay identity decisions without erasing valid early support from promoted objects. Table 4 summarizes the main hyperparameters used in our default configuration. The values are kept fixed across datasets unless otherwise specified. 20 Table 4 Default Savvy hyperparameters. Parameter Value Role Discovery stride s 3 frames Frequency of image-level discovery SAM grid size 32 ×32 Default prompt grid for HMD HMD survival threshold τsurv 0.1 Minimum retained area after proposal competition Border delay 0.05 Delays mask discovery Transient window B 30 frames Deferred-admission duration Duplicate IoU threshold 0.5 Transient–established agreement test Duplicate agreement hits τhit 5 Repeated hits needed for duplicate resolution Visible frames τvis 3 Minimum evidence for transient promotion Appearance EMA α 0.9 Descriptor smoothing within a visible period Appearance threshold τapp 0.1 Reappearance self-consistency gate Competition IoU τcomp 0.8 Overlap threshold for arbitration Competition margin δ 0.1 Minimum appearance-score gap for clear decision Part-whole containment τcontain 0.7 Minimum containment for absorption Part-whole area ratio 1.5 Minimum whole/part area ratio Max active objects 300 Active SAM2 object budget Min historical area 1500 px Track-pruning priority threshold Memory-pruning interval 10 frames Period for stale SAM2 memory cleanup Max SAM2 conditioning frames 4 Conditioning-frame budget in SAM2 attention 

Algorithm 2 summarizes how these components interact during semi-online inference. The algorithm abstracts away low-level SAM2 state updates, but preserves the key control flow: propagation, verification, transient resolution, discovery, and memory control. In the pseudocode, O denotes established tracks, B denotes transient tracks, A

denotes appearance memory, and Y1: t denotes the current semi-online output prefix. ApplyResolution updates this prefix when a transient is promoted or merged, which implements deferred admission without delaying the object’s credited temporal support until the end of the video. 

# A.7 Runtime and Memory Profiling 

We profile the submitted Savvy inference pipeline on the full ScanNet validation split. The profiling uses the de-fault full Savvy configuration, including hierarchical mask discovery, SAM2 propagation, deferred admission, track consolidation, memory pruning, and active-track control. Visualization and metric computation are excluded from timing. Throughput is reported as cumulative average FPS: 

FPS( t) = number of processed frames up to t

elapsed inference time up to t . (25) Figure 6 summarizes the runtime behavior across all ScanNet validation scenes on an NVIDIA A6000 GPU. Thin curves show individual scenes and the dark curve shows the mean. For readability, overlay traces are y-axis capped at the 95th percentile, while the raw data and mean curve are unchanged. The final mean cumulative throughput is 7.4 FPS for the full Savvy pipeline. GPU memory remains bounded at roughly 6–7 GB while the object set grows over time, and the active mask count remains controlled throughout inference. These results show that the explicit object-set maintenance design is practical for long-horizon videos. Although Savvy is not optimized as a real-time deployment system, memory pruning and active-track control prevent un-bounded state growth, while semi-online discovery and propagation remain tractable over the full ScanNet valida-tion split. 21 Require: Video {It}Tt=1 ; video predictor Ψ; image segmenter Φ; discovery stride s

Ensure: Object masks Y = {Yt}Tt=1  

> 1:

O, B, A, Y ← ∅ 

> 2:

C1 ← HMD( I1, ∅, ∅, Φ)  

> 3:

O ← Register(Ψ , C1) 

> 4:

for t = 1 to T do 

> 5:

̂ Mt ← Ψ( It, O) 

> 6:

Yt ← Store( ̂ Mt, O) 

> 7:

A ← UpdateAppearance( A, Yt) 

> 8:

Yt ← SelfConsistencyGate( Yt, A) 

> 9:

Yt ← ArbitrateCompetition( Yt, A) 

> 10:

Rt ← ResolveTransient( B, O, Yt) 

> 11:

(O, B, Y1: t) ← ApplyResolution( Rt, O, B, Y1: t) 

> 12:

(O, Y1: t) ← PartWholeAbsorb( O, Y1: t) 

> 13:

if t mod s = 0 then  

> 14:

Ct ← HMD( It, O, B, Φ)  

> 15:

B ← B ∪ InsertTransient(Ψ , Ct) 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

(Ψ , O) ← PruneMemory(Ψ , O) 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

return Y

Algorithm 2 Savvy Semi-Online Inference 

22 Figure 6 Runtime and memory profiling of Savvy on the ScanNet validation split. We profile the full Savvy pipeline, including HMD, SAM2 propagation, deferred admission, track consolidation, memory pruning, and active-track control. Timing excludes visualization and metric computation. Thin curves show individual scenes and the dark curve shows the mean; overlay traces are capped at the 95th percentile for readability, while the raw data and mean curve are unchanged. The final mean cumulative throughput reaches 7.4 FPS on an NVIDIA A6000. GPU memory remains bounded at roughly 6–7 GB as the object set grows, indicating that memory pruning and active-track control keep long-horizon inference tractable. 

23 B Details of OGA Evaluation 

# B.1 Overview 

OGA is designed to evaluate open-world video segmentation when prediction granularity does not necessarily match the reference annotation. Classical video segmentation metrics such as STQ and VPQ assume a rigid 1:1 correspon-dence between prediction tubes and reference tubes. This assumption is appropriate when predictions are expected to follow the same category and instance decomposition as the benchmark annotation, but becomes restrictive in open-world settings. A valid open-world prediction may decompose a reference object into several coherent parts, or may maintain a visually meaningful object hypothesis whose semantic granularity differs from the annotation. OGA keeps the outer structure of classical video segmentation metrics, but replaces the strict matching layer with a granularity-agnostic support construction. The central change is to treat each reference instance as the anchor of evaluation. Predictions are first assigned to reference instances through a one-sided support criterion, allowing multiple predictions to jointly support the same reference object while preserving strict prediction ownership. For each reference instance, OGA then constructs a temporal support chain, identifies discontinuities in support, selects the dominant coherent fragment, and scores the reference instance only through this dominant fragment. Unless otherwise stated, all OGA metrics are computed in the class-agnostic setting. Semantic labels are ignored, and evaluation is performed over instance identities. Void or ignore regions are excluded from valid support com-putation so that prediction spill into unannotated regions does not unfairly penalize a method when the reference annotation is incomplete. The design principle of OGA is stated as follows 

Key principle. OGA is not merely a relaxed metric: it relaxes granularity while preserving a conservative notion of temporal coherence. It avoids penalizing semantically valid part-level support simply because it violates rigid 1:1 matching, but also avoids over-rewarding fragmented or flickering support by explicitly severing discontinuous support chains and crediting only the dominant fragment. 

# B.2 Granularity-Agnostic Matching 

Let G denote the set of reference instances and P denote the set of predicted instances over an evaluation sequence or window. We use g ∈ G for a reference tube and p ∈ P for a prediction tube. At frame t, their masks are denoted by gt and pt, respectively. All areas and intersections are computed over the valid reference region; pixels labeled as void or ignore are excluded. Classical STQ and VPQ construct matches through strict 1:1 association. OGA instead uses a one-sided, reference-anchored support rule. For each prediction p, we measure how much of the prediction is explained by a reference instance g:

S(p, g ) = |p ∩ g||p| , (26) where |p∩g| denotes the spatiotemporal intersection between prediction and reference, and |p| denotes the predic-tion area after excluding void or ignore regions. This asymmetric score measures prediction support: a prediction is considered valid for g if most of the prediction lies inside g, even if it covers only part of g.For each prediction, we define its valid reference set as 

V(p) = {g ∈ G | IoU( p, g ) ≥ τiou or S(p, g ) ≥ τs} . (27) If V(p) = ∅, the prediction remains unmatched. Otherwise, p is assigned to the reference instance with the strongest support: 

a(p) = arg max  

> g∈V (p)

S(p, g ). (28) This assignment is one-sided. Each prediction can support at most one reference instance, but each reference instance may receive support from multiple predictions. The support pool of a reference instance is therefore 

P(g) = {p ∈ P | a(p) = g}. (29) 24 This preserves strict ownership on the prediction side, preventing a single prediction from being credited to multiple references, while allowing n:1 support on the reference side. For each frame t where g is present, we define the active support set 

At(g) = {p ∈ P (g) | | pt ∩ gt| > 0}, (30) and its support mass 

Mt(g) = ∑

> p∈At(g)

|pt ∩ gt|. (31) The sequence 

C(g) = {(t, A t(g), M t(g)) }t:gt̸ =∅ (32) is the support chain of reference instance g. This support chain is the basic object used by the later dominant-fragment construction. It records not only how much support g receives over time, but also which prediction iden-tities carry that support. 

# B.3 GA-Adapted STQ 

STQ evaluates video segmentation through two complementary terms: association quality (AQ), which measures identity-consistent support of reference instances, and geometric quality (GQ), which measures foreground cover-age. OGA preserves the outer STQ form, 

STQ = √AQ · GQ , (33) but replaces the strict 1:1 association used in classical STQ with the GA support construction from Sec. B.2. Throughout this section, let Ωt denote the valid evaluation domain at frame t. All frame-level areas are computed over Ωt unless otherwise stated. This keeps the metric definition independent of a particular dataset’s void or ignore-region policy. 

Dominant-fragment support. For each reference instance g, OGA first constructs its support chain 

C(g) = {(t, A t(g), M t(g)) }t:gt̸ =∅, (34) where At(g) is the set of assigned predictions actively supporting g at frame t, and Mt(g) is the total prediction– reference overlap mass at that frame. As described in Sec. B.5, this chain is partitioned into temporally coherent fragments, and only the dominant fragment F ⋆(g) is used for scoring. Let T ⋆g denote the set of frames covered by F ⋆(g), and let P⋆(g) denote the set of prediction identities active in this dominant fragment. OGA defines the true-positive support area of g as 

TPA ⋆g = ∑ 

> t∈T⋆g

∑

> p∈P ⋆(g)

|pt ∩ gt|. (35) The prediction area credited to the same dominant fragment is 

PredArea ⋆g = ∑ 

> t∈T⋆g

∑

> p∈P ⋆(g)

|pt|. (36) Since areas are evaluated over Ωt, the prediction area above should be read as the area of pt inside the valid evaluation domain. Let 

Bg = ∑ 

> t:gt̸=∅

|gt| (37) be the full reference area of g over the evaluation sequence. The dominant-fragment union is 

Union ⋆g = Bg + PredArea ⋆g − TPA ⋆g , (38) 25 and the corresponding virtual IoU is 

rawIoU ⋆g = TPA ⋆g

Union ⋆g + ε . (39) Importantly, the union uses the full reference area Bg , not only the reference area inside the dominant-fragment frames. This makes the relaxation conservative: a short but pure fragment cannot receive a high score unless it explains a substantial portion of the reference instance over its full temporal extent. 

Soft temporal stability. Since GA support may involve multiple prediction identities, OGA includes a stability term to discourage fragmented or flickering support even within the dominant fragment. For each selected frame t ∈ T ⋆g ,let 

˜At(g) = {p ∈ P ⋆(g) | | pt ∩ gt| > 0} (40) be the active support identity set restricted to the dominant fragment. For consecutive selected support states, OGA computes 

Jt(g) = | ˜At(g) ∩ ˜At+1 (g)|| ˜At(g) ∪ ˜At+1 (g)| + ε . (41) The soft stability of g is then 

Stab ⋆g = 1

|T ⋆g | − 1

∑ 

> t,t +1 ∈T⋆g

Jt(g), (42) with Stab ⋆g = 1 when the dominant fragment contains only one support state. 

Area-efficiency penalty. Because GA allows multiple predictions to jointly support one reference instance, OGA also penalizes inefficient support that uses substantially more prediction area than the reference object requires: 

AreaPen ⋆g =

(

min 

(

1, Bg

PredArea ⋆g + ε

)) γ

. (43) This term remains near one when the credited support area is comparable to the reference area, and decreases when the assigned support uses excessive area. 

GA association quality. The final dominant-fragment score for reference instance g is 

Score ⋆g = rawIoU ⋆g · Stab ⋆g · AreaPen ⋆g . (44) Its contribution to AQ is weighted by the amount of true-positive support: 

Qg = TPA ⋆g · Score ⋆g . (45) OGA then averages the normalized contribution over reference instances: 

AQ GA = 1

|G| 

∑

> g∈G

Qg

Bg + ε . (46) 

Geometric quality. The geometric term measures foreground coverage over the chosen valid evaluation domain. Let Pt(x) and Gt(x) denote the prediction and reference label maps at frame t, with 0 denoting background, void, or ignore according to the dataset convention. OGA computes 

GQ GA =

∑ 

> t

|{ x ∈ Ωt | Pt(x)̸ = 0 , G t(x)̸ = 0 }| 

∑ 

> t

|{ x ∈ Ωt | Gt(x)̸ = 0 }| + ε . (47) Thus, GQ measures how much of the valid reference foreground is covered by prediction foreground. Finally, 

STQ GA = √AQ GA · GQ GA . (48) 26 Void and ignore-region handling. The choice of Ωt is dataset-dependent. In datasets with incomplete or partially reconstructed annotations, such as ScanNet, unlabeled regions may still contain visually valid objects or object parts. In this case, we use a void-tolerant domain in which prediction spill into GT-void pixels is excluded from prediction-area and overlap accounting. This prevents a faithful prediction from being penalized merely because the reference annotation is incomplete. In datasets with more complete reconstruction and annotation, such as HM3D, this tolerance can be reduced or removed by choosing Ωt to include the full image or the full annotated evaluation region. This design separates the GA matching principle from dataset-specific annotation completeness. The key difference from classical STQ is therefore not the outer aggregation form, but the support unit used to compute AQ. Classical STQ evaluates association through strict matched prediction–reference identities, while OGA evaluates each reference instance through its dominant coherent support fragment. This preserves STQ’s emphasis on temporal association while making it robust to valid granularity mismatch. 

# B.4 GA-Adapted VPQ 

VPQ evaluates panoptic video segmentation by computing PQ over sliding temporal windows and averaging over windows. Classical VPQ uses strict 1:1 matching inside each window: a prediction tube and a reference tube form a true positive only if their IoU exceeds a fixed threshold. OGA keeps the same windowed PQ structure, but replaces the matched-pair IoU with the dominant-fragment score defined in Sec. B.3. Let W = [ t, t + k) denote a temporal window of length k. Within each window, OGA recomputes prediction-to-reference assignment locally using the GA matching rule. This window-local assignment is important because a prediction may be valid support for a reference in one window but not in another, especially under long videos with disappearances, reappearances, or partial observations. 

Window-level support construction. For each reference instance g ∈ G W appearing in window W , OGA collects the set of predictions assigned to it within the window: 

PW (g) = {p ∈ P W | aW (p) = g}, (49) where aW is the window-local GA assignment. As in sequence-level STQ, OGA constructs the support chain of 

g inside the window, partitions it into sever-induced fragments, and selects the dominant fragment F ⋆W (g) by maximum reference-overlap mass. Using this dominant fragment, OGA computes a window-level score 

Score Wg = rawIoU W,⋆ g · Stab W,⋆ g · AreaPen W,⋆ g . (50) The terms are defined analogously to Sec. B.3, but all areas, supports, and fragments are restricted to the window 

W .

True positives and false negatives. A reference instance is counted as a true positive if its dominant-fragment score exceeds the VPQ matching threshold: 

g ∈ TP W ⇐⇒ Score Wg > τ vpq . (51) The number of true positives and false negatives are therefore 

TP W = ∣∣{g ∈ G W | Score Wg > τ vpq }∣∣ , (52) and 

FN W = |G W | − TP W . (53) This mirrors classical VPQ, except that the matching score is no longer a rigid pairwise IoU between one prediction and one reference. Instead, each reference is evaluated through its dominant coherent GA support. 27 Ordinary and fragment-level false positives. Relaxing 1:1 matching changes the meaning of false positives. In classical VPQ, any prediction not matched to a reference is counted as an FP. Under GA matching, however, a predic-tion may belong to a non-dominant support fragment of some reference. Counting all such predictions as ordinary false positives would double-penalize fragmented support: once through the dominant-fragment selection, and again as unmatched predictions. OGA therefore decomposes false positives into ordinary FP and fragment-level FP: 

FP W = FP W 

> ord

+ FP W

> frag

. (54) The ordinary FP term counts prediction tubes in the window that are not credited by any matched dominant frag-ment, do not belong to any reference support fragment, and are not dominated by void or ignored regions: 

FP W 

> ord

= ∣∣{p ∈ P W

∣∣ p / ∈ P W

> match

, p / ∈ P W

> frag

, p / ∈ P W

> void

}∣ ∣ . (55) Here PW 

> match

denotes predictions credited by matched dominant fragments, PW 

> frag

denotes predictions appearing in any sever-induced support fragment for any reference in the window, and PW 

> void

denotes predictions whose support lies mostly in void or ignored regions under the chosen evaluation-domain policy. The fragment-level FP term penalizes temporal fragmentation directly. Let nWg be the number of sever-induced fragments in the support chain of reference instance g inside window W . OGA defines 

FP W 

> frag

= ∑

> g∈G W

max( nWg − 1, 0) . (56) Thus, a reference supported by one coherent fragment incurs no fragment FP, while each additional sever-induced fragment contributes an FP unit. This preserves VPQ’s penalty for identity fragmentation without forcing strict 1:1 

matching. 

Window PQ and VPQ. The window-level GA-PQ is then 

PQ W 

> GA

=

∑   

> g∈G W:Score Wg>τ vpq

Score Wg

TP W + 12 FP W + 12 FN W + ε . (57) For a window length k, GA-VPQ is the average over all sliding windows of that length: 

VPQ GA  

> k

= 1

|W k|

∑ 

> W∈W k

PQ W

> GA

. (58) We also report VPQ ∞ by taking the full sequence as a single window. Compared with classical VPQ, the denominator retains the same TP/FP/FN structure, but the support unit changes. True positives are reference instances explained by dominant coherent support fragments; ordinary false positives remain unsupported predictions; and fragment-level false positives explicitly penalize excess severed support. This makes VPQ robust to granularity mismatch while preserving sensitivity to identity breakage and over-fragmentation. 

# B.5 Dominant Fragment Selection 

Under GA matching, a reference instance may be supported by multiple prediction identities over time. This is nec-essary for granularity-agnostic evaluation, but it introduces a new question: which portion of the support should be credited as temporally coherent? If all assigned predictions were credited indiscriminately, fragmented or flick-ering predictions could be over-rewarded. OGA therefore converts the support pool of each reference instance into a support chain, severs the chain at identity discontinuities, and scores only the dominant coherent fragment. For a reference instance g, let 

C(g) = {(tk, A tk (g), M tk (g)) }Kg 

> k=1

(59) denote its non-empty support chain, where Atk (g) is the set of prediction identities supporting g at support state 

tk, and 

Mtk (g) = ∑ 

> p∈Atk(g)

|ptk ∩ gtk | (60) is the total support mass at that state. The chain includes only frames where g is present and receives non-empty assigned support. 28 Persistent-support ratio. To determine whether support remains temporally coherent across adjacent support states, OGA measures how much support is carried by the same prediction identities before and after the transition. For two consecutive states tk and tk+1 , define 

ρ(k) 

> g

=

∑  

> p∈Atk(g)∩Atk+1 (g)

(|ptk ∩ gtk | + |ptk+1 ∩ gtk+1 |)∑  

> p∈Atk(g)∪Atk+1 (g)

(|ptk ∩ gtk | + |ptk+1 ∩ gtk+1 |) + ε . (61) The numerator measures support mass carried by persistent identities appearing on both sides of the transition. The denominator measures the total support mass active across the transition. Thus, ρ(k) 

> g

is high when the same prediction identities continue to support g, and low when support is largely replaced by different identities. A sever is declared when the persistent-support ratio falls below a threshold, 

ρ(k) 

> g

< τ sever . (62) Sever points partition the support chain into temporally coherent fragments: 

C(g) → { F (1)  

> g

, F (2)  

> g

, . . . , F (ng ) 

> g

}. (63) 

Fragment mass. Each fragment is scored by the amount of reference-overlap mass it carries. For a fragment F (r) 

> g

,define 

W (r) 

> g

= ∑ 

> (t,A t(g),M t(g)) ∈F(r)
> g

Mt(g). (64) The dominant fragment is selected as 

F ⋆(g) = arg max  

> F(r)
> g

W (r) 

> g

. (65) In implementation, ties are broken by fragment length, favoring the longer support fragment when two fragments carry the same overlap mass. The selected fragment determines both the credited prediction identities and the credited temporal span: 

T ⋆g = {t | (t, A t(g), M t(g)) ∈ F ⋆(g)}, (66) and 

P⋆(g) = ⋃ 

> (t,A t(g),M t(g)) ∈F⋆(g)

At(g). (67) Only T ⋆g and P⋆(g) are used to compute the dominant-fragment score in GA-STQ and GA-VPQ. 

Conservative effect. Dominant fragment selection is intentionally conservative. A reference instance may receive support from many predictions across the full video, but only the most coherent high-mass fragment is credited. Support outside the dominant fragment is not used to increase the GT score. In VPQ, extra sever-induced fragments are additionally penalized through fragment-level false positives. Therefore, GA matching relaxes the granularity constraint, but dominant-fragment selection prevents the relaxation from becoming a free aggregation of discon-nected prediction fragments. 

# B.6 Dominant Fragment as a Practical Relaxation of Coherent Support Selection 

We now provide a formal view of the ideal support selection problem underlying the dominant-fragment rule. The goal is to clarify that dominant-fragment selection is not a lenient relaxation. Rather, it is a tractable and con-servative surrogate for a harder combinatorial problem: selecting the strongest temporally coherent support core among all predictions assigned to a reference instance. 29 Setup. Fix a reference instance g over a video. Let 

P(g) = {p1, . . . , p N } (68) denote the set of prediction identities assigned to g under GA matching. For each prediction p ∈ P (g) and frame t,define the framewise support mass 

ap,t = |pt ∩ gt|. (69) For a selected subset S ⊆ P (g), define its active support at frame t as 

At(S) = {p ∈ S | ap,t > 0}, (70) and its total support mass as 

mt(S) = ∑

> p∈S

ap,t . (71) 

Temporal coherence. The purpose of dominant-fragment selection is to prevent support from being optimistically pooled across temporally disconnected identity fragments. For a selected subset S and adjacent frames t, t + 1 ,define the persistent-support ratio 

ρt(S) = 

∑

> p∈At(S)∩At+1 (S)

(ap,t + ap,t +1 )

∑

> p∈At(S)∪At+1 (S)

(ap,t + ap,t +1 ) + ε . (72) A transition is coherent if 

ρt(S) > τ sever . (73) Thus, a support subset is sever-free over an interval [u, v ] if every adjacent transition within the interval satisfies the coherence condition whenever support is present. 

Ideal coherent support-core search. An ideal evaluator would select the subset of predictions and temporal in-terval that maximizes coherent support for g:

max  

> S⊆P (g),[u,v ]
> v

∑

> t=u

mt(S)s.t. mt(S) > 0, ∀t ∈ [u, v ],ρt(S) > τ sever , ∀t = u, . . . , v − 1.

(74) This formulation searches for the strongest temporally coherent explanation of the reference object. A more score-faithful variant could replace the numerator objective with a virtual-IoU or area-efficiency objective, but Eq. (74) already captures the core difficulty: the evaluator must jointly choose a prediction subset and a coherent temporal support interval. 

Graph interpretation. The search in Eq. (74) can be interpreted as a maximum-weight coherent subgraph selection problem. Construct a graph whose nodes represent candidate prediction-time support units, e.g., 

vp,t ⇐⇒ ap,t > 0, (75) with node weight ap,t . Edges connect support units that can coexist within a coherent explanation: same-identity edges connect vp,t to vp,t +1 across time, while compatibility edges connect prediction identities whose joint in-clusion preserves the sever-free condition. Under this view, the ideal problem seeks a high-weight connected or coherent subgraph satisfying temporal compatibility constraints. This family of problems is combinatorial. It contains the same subset-selection structure as maximum-weight con-nected subgraph [7] and prize-collecting Steiner-style[8] formulations: selecting a high-weight subset of nodes is easy without connectivity or coherence constraints, but becomes hard once the selected support must remain con-nected or temporally compatible. Therefore, exact coherent support-core search is impractical as an evaluation primitive, especially when repeated for every reference instance and every VPQ window. 30 Dominant-fragment surrogate. OGA therefore adopts a deterministic surrogate. Instead of searching over all sub-sets S ⊆ P (g), it first builds the support chain induced by all assigned predictions: 

C(g) = {(t, A t(g), M t(g)) }t:gt̸ =∅. (76) It then computes the persistent-support ratio between adjacent support states, splits the chain at sever points, and obtains a set of sever-delimited fragments 

F(g) = {F (1)  

> g

, . . . , F (ng ) 

> g

}. (77) Each fragment is scored by its total reference-overlap mass: 

W (r) 

> g

= ∑ 

> (t,A t(g),M t(g)) ∈F(r)
> g

Mt(g). (78) The credited support is the dominant fragment 

F ⋆(g) = arg max    

> F(r)
> g∈F (g)

W (r) 

> g

. (79) 

Why this is conservative. The dominant-fragment rule relaxes spatial granularity but tightens temporal credit assignment. Multiple predictions may jointly support a reference instance, but disconnected support fragments are not freely pooled. Once sever points appear, only the highest-mass coherent fragment contributes to the GT score; support outside this fragment is not credited. In GA-VPQ, additional sever-induced fragments are further penalized through fragment-level false positives. Thus, OGA does not turn n:1 matching into optimistic aggregation. It rewards the strongest coherent explanation of the reference object while discouraging temporal fragmentation and identity replacement. 

Practical motivation. A fully optimal coherent-core search would require combinatorial exploration over predic-tion subsets and temporal intervals. Such an optimization would be expensive, difficult to make deterministic, and ill-suited as a standard evaluation primitive. Dominant-fragment selection provides a simple, reproducible approx-imation with the intended inductive bias: credit the single strongest temporally coherent support chain, rather than recombining disconnected evidence after the fact. 

# B.7 Structural Diagnostics: Persistence and Concentration 

GA matching relaxes the rigid 1:1 constraint by allowing multiple predictions to support the same reference instance. This makes the primary metrics fairer under granularity mismatch, but it also exposes structural failure modes that strict matching would otherwise collapse into a single score. In particular, once n:1 support is allowed, we need to distinguish between support that is persistent and compact, and support that is obtained through many fragmented or redundant identities. OGA therefore reports two complementary structural diagnostics: identity persistence (IP) and identity concentra-tion (IC). IP is a mass-based diagnostic: it asks whether most overlap mass is carried by one dominant identity. IC is a graph-based diagnostic: it asks how many distinct identities ever participate in valid support relations. These two views are related but not interchangeable. Both diagnostics are defined on two axes. The prediction axis asks whether each predicted identity remains attached to a compact set of reference objects. The reference axis asks whether each reference object is explained by a compact set of prediction identities. These axes reveal different errors. Low prediction-axis scores indicate identity bleeding, where one prediction spreads across multiple references. Low reference-axis scores indicate identity fragmentation, where one reference is split across many prediction IDs. We therefore interpret IP and IC jointly. High IP but low IC can occur when one identity dominates the overlap mass but many auxiliary fragments also appear. High IC but low IP can occur when only a few identities are involved, but no single identity carries the reference consistently. Together, the two diagnostics provide a structural view of how a method organizes prediction identities beyond aggregate overlap scores. 31 B.8 Identity Persistence 

Identity persistence (IP) measures whether the support mass of an object is dominated by a single identity over time. While GA-STQ and GA-VPQ provide primary fidelity scores, they do not by themselves reveal whether a method obtains support through stable identities or through many short-lived fragments. IP provides a mass-based diag-nostic for this question. Let Mp,g denote the sequence-level overlap mass between prediction p and reference instance g:

Mp,g = ∑

> t

|pt ∩ gt|. (80) Let 

Ap = ∑

> t

|pt|, Bg = ∑

> t

|gt| (81) denote the total prediction and reference areas over the evaluation sequence, computed over the chosen evaluation domain Ωt.

Prediction-axis persistence. Prediction-axis persistence measures whether each prediction identity primarily sup-ports one reference instance: 

IP P (p) = max g∈G Mp,g 

Ap + ε . (82) A high IP P (p) means that prediction p is mostly attached to a single reference object. A low value indicates identity bleeding: the same prediction identity spreads its mass across multiple reference objects. The dataset-level prediction-axis persistence is 

IP P = 1

|P| 

∑

> p∈P

IP P (p). (83) 

Reference-axis persistence. Reference-axis persistence measures whether each reference instance is mainly car-ried by one prediction identity: 

IP G(g) = max p∈P Mp,g 

Bg + ε . (84) A high IP G(g) means that the reference object is consistently explained by one dominant prediction. A low value indicates identity fragmentation: the reference object is split across multiple prediction IDs over time. The dataset-level reference-axis persistence is 

IP G = 1

|G| 

∑

> g∈G

IP G(g). (85) The two axes should be interpreted together. IP P captures whether prediction identities remain pure with respect to reference objects, while IP G captures whether reference objects are carried by persistent prediction identities. A method can have high IP P but low IP G when it produces many pure but short-lived fragments; conversely, low 

IP P indicates that prediction identities bleed across multiple reference objects. 

# B.9 Identity Concentration 

Identity concentration (IC) measures whether the prediction–reference support structure is compact. Unlike IP, which is based on overlap mass, IC is based on the number of distinct identities that ever participate in valid support relations. It therefore captures structural fragmentation and bleeding even when the overlap mass is dominated by one identity. 32 Let p ∼ g denote that prediction p and reference instance g form a valid relaxed match at least once under the GA criterion. Equivalently, p ∼ g if there exists at least one frame where their overlap satisfies the frame-level relaxed matching rule. We define the set of reference instances ever matched by prediction p as 

Gever (p) = {g ∈ G | p ∼ g}, (86) and the set of predictions ever matched to reference instance g as 

Pever (g) = {p ∈ P | p ∼ g}. (87) 

Prediction-axis concentration. Prediction-axis concentration measures whether a predicted identity remains struc-turally attached to a small number of reference objects: 

IC P (p) = 

{ 1 

> |G ever (p)|

, |G ever (p)| > 0,

0, otherwise . (88) A high IC P (p) means that prediction p is structurally concentrated on one reference object. A low value indicates identity bleeding, where the same prediction identity becomes valid support for multiple reference objects over time. The dataset-level prediction-axis concentration is 

IC P = 1

|P| 

∑

> p∈P

IC P (p). (89) 

Reference-axis concentration. Reference-axis concentration measures whether a reference object is structurally supported by a compact set of prediction identities: 

IC G(g) = 

{ 1 

> |P ever (g)|

, |P ever (g)| > 0,

0, otherwise . (90) A high IC G(g) means that the reference object is supported by only one or a few prediction identities. A low value indicates identity fragmentation: many prediction IDs become valid support for the same reference object. The dataset-level reference-axis concentration is 

IC G = 1

|G| 

∑

> g∈G

IC G(g). (91) 

Relation to IP. IC and IP are complementary. IP measures whether most support mass is dominated by one identity, while IC measures how many identities participate in the support graph at all. For example, a method may achieve high IP G if one prediction carries most of a reference object’s overlap mass, but still have low IC G if many short-lived auxiliary predictions also touch the same reference. Conversely, a method may have reasonable concentration but low persistence if a small number of identities alternate support without one identity dominating the overlap mass. Thus, IC should not be interpreted as an overlap score. It is a structural compactness diagnostic for the prediction– reference support graph. Together with IP, it reveals whether a method maintains a clean object identity structure or obtains its primary scores through fragmented, redundant, or bleeding identities. 

# B.10 Prediction–Reference Support Matrix 

The prediction–reference support matrix provides a direct visualization of the structural relations summarized by IP and IC. While IP and IC reduce identity structure to scalar diagnostics, the support matrix exposes the full many-to-many pattern between prediction identities and reference instances. It is therefore useful for interpreting whether a method produces compact object identities, fragmented support, or identity bleeding. 33 Let P = {p1, . . . , p N } denote prediction identities and G = {g1, . . . , g M } denote reference instances. We define a weighted support matrix 

W ∈ RN ×M , Wi,j = Mpi,g j

Api + ε , (92) where 

Mpi,g j = ∑

> t

|pi,t ∩ gj,t | (93) is the sequence-level overlap mass and Api = ∑ 

> t

|pi,t | is the total area of prediction pi. Thus, Wi,j measures the fraction of prediction pi explained by reference object gj . A binary support matrix can also be obtained by thresholding the relaxed matching relation: 

Ei,j = ⊮[pi ∼ gj ], (94) where pi ∼ gj denotes that prediction pi and reference gj form a valid relaxed match at least once. The rows and columns of this matrix correspond to the two diagnostic axes. Row dispersion indicates prediction-side bleeding: if one prediction row has nonzero support over many references, the same predicted identity is being shared across multiple objects. Column dispersion indicates reference-side fragmentation: if one reference column receives support from many prediction rows, the reference object is split across many predicted identities. IC summarizes this binary structure: 

IC P (pi) = 1

∑ 

> j

Ei,j 

, IC G(gj ) = 1

∑ 

> i

Ei,j 

, (95) with score 0 when the corresponding row or column has no valid support. This matrix is analogous in spirit to a detection confusion matrix, but it is defined over instance support rather than semantic classes. A clean prediction structure should be sparse and concentrated: each prediction row should mainly support one reference, and each reference column should be explained by a compact set of prediction identities. Different failure modes appear as different matrix patterns. Over-fragmentation creates tall columns with many active prediction rows. Identity bleeding creates wide rows with support across many reference columns. Missed objects appear as empty or weak reference columns, while spurious predictions appear as empty or weak prediction rows. This view is especially useful under GA evaluation. Since GA intentionally permits multiple predictions to support one reference object, a high primary score alone does not reveal whether the support came from a compact object set or from many auxiliary fragments. The support matrix makes this structure explicit. IP measures whether the mass in each row or column is dominated by one entry, while IC measures how many entries are active at all. To-gether, the scalar diagnostics and the matrix visualization provide a more complete picture of identity organization under granularity-agnostic matching. 

Visualization protocol. The definition above specifies the support matrix itself, but the readability of the visualiza-tion also depends on the ordering of prediction and reference identities. In Appendix G.1, we describe the plotting protocol used in our figures, including the dominant-reference sorting rule, the two normalizations by Ap and Bg ,and representative observations for Savvy, DEVA+SAM, and EntitySAM. 

# B.11 Additional Temporal Diagnostics 

In addition to IP and IC, OGA includes optional temporal diagnostics that characterize the structure of support over time. These diagnostics are not used as primary fidelity scores. Instead, they provide additional views of whether a reference object is supported by a temporally connected and recurring set of prediction identities. We report two such diagnostics: connected support coverage, denoted as Cluster, and compact support-pattern coverage, denoted as Patt k.

Connected support coverage. For each reference instance g, consider the prediction identities that ever provide valid support to g. We build a support graph whose nodes are these prediction identities. Two prediction identities are connected if they co-occur as active support for g in at least one frame, or if they appear in adjacent support states, corresponding to an end-to-end handoff. The connected components of this graph represent temporally linked support groups. 34 Let Cg = {C(1)  

> g

, . . . , C (rg ) 

> g

} denote the connected components of the support graph for g. Each component covers a subset of frames in which at least one prediction identity in that component supports g. We define the coverage of a component as 

cov( C(r) 

> g

) = 

∣∣∣∣∣∣∣⋃

> p∈C(r)
> g

Tp,g 

∣∣∣∣∣∣∣

, (96) where Tp,g is the set of frames where prediction p supports reference instance g. The Cluster score for g is the frame coverage of the largest connected support component: 

Cluster( g) = max C∈C g cov( C)

|Tg | + ε , (97) where Tg is the set of frames in which g is present. The dataset-level score is 

Cluster = 1

|G| 

∑

> g∈G

Cluster( g). (98) A high Cluster score indicates that most of the reference object’s temporal extent is covered by one connected support component. A low score suggests that support for the same reference object is broken into temporally disconnected groups. 

Compact support-pattern coverage. Cluster measures connectedness, but it does not directly measure whether the support can be explained by a small recurring set of prediction identities. Patt k addresses this by asking how much of a reference object’s temporal extent can be covered by a compact pattern of k prediction identities. For a reference instance g, let Tp,g again denote the set of frames where prediction p supports g. For a fixed pattern size k, we define 

Patt k(g) = max  

> {p1,...,p k}⊆P ever (g)

|Tp1,g ∩ · · · ∩ Tpk ,g ||Tg | + ε . (99) This measures the best recurring k-identity support pattern for g. For example, Patt 1 is high when a single prediction identity repeatedly supports the reference object, while Patt 2 can capture a stable two-part decomposition that co-occurs over time. The dataset-level Patt k score is 

Patt k = 1

|G| 

∑

> g∈G

Patt k(g). (100) 

Complementary temporal axes. Cluster and Patt k capture complementary notions of temporal structure. Cluster measures the span of the best connected support chain: identities may change over time, but they remain linked through co-occurrence or adjacent handoff. Patt k measures the span of the best co-existing support core: a fixed set of k prediction identities must support the reference object on the same frames. Thus, Cluster is tolerant to temporally connected handoffs, while Patt k is stricter and emphasizes recurring simultaneous support. 

# B.12 Evaluation Hyperparameters 

Table 5 summarizes the default hyperparameters used in the OGA evaluation pipeline. The same settings are used across methods to ensure fair comparison. The two most important thresholds are the prediction-support threshold 

τios , which controls whether a prediction is admissible as support for a reference instance, and the sever threshold 

τsever , which controls whether adjacent support states are split into separate fragments. We use τios = 0 .5 and 

τsever = 0 .5 by default. For GA-STQ, dominant-fragment scoring, soft support-set stability, and the area-efficiency penalty are enabled. For GA-VPQ, the same dominant-fragment score is used as the window-level matching score, with a VPQ threshold of 

0.5. We report VPQ over windows k ∈ { 0, 5, 15 , 25 , 35 , ∞} , where k = 0 denotes single-frame PQ and k = ∞

denotes full-sequence VPQ. 35 Table 5 Default hyperparameters used in the OGA evaluation pipeline. Unless otherwise stated, these values are fixed across datasets and methods. Dataset-specific ignore labels and sampling policies are described in Sec. C. 

Component Parameter / Setting Default value 

GA matching Prediction-support threshold τios 0.5 Auxiliary IoU threshold τiou 0.5 Prediction ownership Each prediction assigned to at most one GT Reference-side support Multiple predictions may support one GT Assignment score IoS( p → g) = |p ∩ g|/|p|

Assignment scope for STQ Sequence-level Dominant fragment Sever threshold τsever 0.5 Sever criterion ρ(k) 

> g

< τ sever 

Fragment selection score Total GT-overlap mass Tie-breaker Longer fragment Dominant-fragment scoring Enabled GA-STQ Soft stability term Enabled Area-penalty exponent γ 1.0 AQ normalization Mean over GT instances GQ definition Foreground coverage over valid evaluation domain Ωt

GA-VPQ VPQ matching threshold τvpq 0.5 Window lengths k 0, 5, 15, 25, 35, ∞

k = 0 interpretation Single-frame PQ 

k = ∞ interpretation Full-sequence VPQ Fragment-level FP ∑ 

> g

max( nWg − 1, 0) 

IC diagnostics Frame-level relaxed match IoU threshold 0.5 Frame-level relaxed match IoS threshold 0.5 Void-tolerant matching Enabled when dataset policy uses void tolerance Redundancy factor for IC G Disabled Weighted IC P Disabled Temporal diagnostics Co-occurrence similarity threshold 0.5 Maximum pattern size 3Cluster graph edge Co-occurrence or adjacent handoff Patt k aggregation Best co-existing k-identity support core Void / ignore policy VIPSeg ignore label -1 in in-memory evaluation maps ScanNet ignore label 0HM3D ignore label 0

For structural diagnostics, IC is computed from the unweighted ever-support graph: IC P is the inverse number of GTs ever matched by a prediction, and IC G is the inverse number of predictions ever matched to a GT. We disable optional redundancy weighting and weighted IC P in the reported results to keep the diagnostic structural and interpretable. Temporal diagnostics use connected support components for Cluster and best co-existing support cores up to k = 3 for Patt k.36 C Dataset and Evaluation Protocol 

This section summarizes the dataset-specific preprocessing and evaluation protocols used in our experiments. All datasets are evaluated in a class-agnostic open-world setting: semantic category labels are removed, and methods are evaluated only by their ability to discover, segment, and maintain object identities over time. For ScanNet and HM3D (HM3D-Sem v0.2), all videos are sampled from their validation splits. Unless otherwise stated, all reported OGA metrics use the same core evaluation functions described in Sec. B. Our benchmark suite is designed to cover two common modes of open-world video segmentation. VIPSeg rep-resents the standard video panoptic segmentation regime, with dynamic objects, cluttered scenes, and panoptic instance annotations with semantic category labels. It is therefore useful for studying how conventional video seg-mentation metrics behave after semantic labels are removed but annotation granularity remains fixed. ScanNet and HM3D represent the long-horizon scene-centric regime, where videos contain dynamic ego-motion, repeated object re-observation, and loop-closure-like revisits in indoor environments. Together, these datasets cover both common panoptic video segmentation and realistic long-horizon open-world object maintenance. Long-driving panoptic datasets such as Waymo Open Dataset and Cityscapes-VPS provide an important comple-mentary direction, but we leave them to future work; the present suite already spans the two OVS modes central to this paper. 

# C.1 VIPSeg 

VIPSeg is used as a controlled testbed for granularity-agnostic evaluation under the standard video panoptic seg-mentation setting. Its videos contain moving objects, cluttered scenes, and annotation-defined object instances, making it a useful benchmark for exposing the limitation of rigid 1:1 matching. In particular, VIPSeg allows us to isolate an important point: class-agnostic evaluation alone does not remove annotation-granularity bias. Even when semantic labels are ignored, a method can still be favored or penalized depending on whether its predicted object decomposition matches the benchmark annotation. For our class-agnostic protocol, all VIPSeg categories are collapsed into a single foreground entity category. The RGB panoptic annotations and predictions are converted into plain instance maps, where each segment is represented only by its identity. Ignored pixels are represented as −1 in the in-memory evaluation maps. This ignore value is used only internally during evaluation and is not written into the saved panoptic PNG files. Savvy predictions are exported in the standard VIPSeg panoptic submission format. Internally, Savvy produces a set of object masks per frame. These masks are flattened into a panoptic map using area-priority rasterization: larger masks are written first and smaller masks later, so visible small regions are not swallowed by overlapping large masks. The resulting panoptic PNGs and prediction JSON are then converted back into class-agnostic instance maps for OGA evaluation. We report GA-adapted STQ, AQ, GQ, VPQ k, VPQ ∞, IP, IC, and temporal diagnostics. For VPQ, we use window lengths 

k ∈ { 0, 5, 15 , 25 , 35 , ∞} , where k = 0 denotes the single-frame setting and k = ∞ denotes the full-video window. 

# C.2 ScanNet 

ScanNet is used to represent long-horizon indoor exploration under real camera motion. Compared with VIPSeg, ScanNet sequences are longer and contain stronger viewpoint changes, repeated object re-observation, and loop-closure-like revisits. These properties make ScanNet a natural testbed for evaluating persistent object discovery and long-range identity maintenance. ScanNet also introduces an important annotation challenge: because the reference labels are derived from recon-structed 3D scenes, some visually valid regions may be unlabeled or incomplete due to reconstruction coverage. For this reason, ScanNet is evaluated with a void-tolerant policy: prediction spill into GT-void regions is excluded from prediction-area and overlap accounting. This prevents a method from being penalized for segmenting visually valid regions that are absent from the reconstructed annotation. The ScanNet protocol therefore emphasizes two aspects of OVS that are not fully captured by short panoptic videos: whether a method can maintain a stable object set over long temporal spans, and whether it can re-associate objects after significant viewpoint change or absence. 37 C.3 HM3D 

HM3D is used as a long-horizon indoor benchmark for evaluating open-world object maintenance under realis-tic embodied navigation. Unlike short panoptic videos, HM3D trajectories are designed to include extended ego-motion, repeated object re-observation, viewpoint change, and room-to-room transitions. This makes the dataset complementary to VIPSeg and ScanNet: VIPSeg tests standard video panoptic behavior under dynamic clutter, Scan-Net tests real reconstructed indoor videos, and HM3D provides controlled long-horizon indoor trajectories with semantic and instance renderings. 

HM3D-106 trajectory-composition benchmark. We construct an HM3D trajectory-composition benchmark from the local HM3D validation partition. Among the 100 validation scene directories, 36 contain all assets required by our trajectory generator and renderer: .basis.glb , .basis.navmesh , and .semantic.txt . The remaining scenes are excluded because the missing semantic metadata prevents semantic/instance rendering and region-aware trajectory selection. Thus, the 36-scene subset is the fully annotated validation subset available to this pipeline, rather than an arbitrary downsampling of the validation partition. Across these 36 scenes, Habitat-Sim exposes 569 semantic regions/rooms. We generate 106 rendered scans in total, consisting of three trajectory types. First, 82 scans are local multi-loop room trajectories. Each scan samples two or three navigable loop centers within a semantic region, performs yaw sweeps around these centers, and connects them with smoothed navigable shortest-path motion. Second, 24 scans are adjacent-region round trips. These trajectories move between two distinct semantic regions, perform partial or moderate yaw sweeps at each endpoint, and return to the starting region, creating loop-closure-like revisits. The final HM3D-106 benchmark contains 293,331 rendered frames. Each scan provides RGB frames, semantic maps, instance maps, camera poses, an instance-to-category lookup, and a 30 FPS RGB preview video. Semantic and instance maps are rendered as 16-bit PNG label maps to preserve integer IDs compactly. 

Trajectory design. The trajectory generator is designed to produce stable yet challenging long-horizon scans. Local scans combine yaw sweeps, smoothed connector motion, and moderate pitch variation. Adjacent-region scans add harder inter-region traversal by moving between semantically distinct regions such as living/dining, kitchen/dining, bedroom/bathroom, or bedroom/living areas. Connector motion is oversampled and yaw-capped to avoid abrupt camera jumps, while pitch waves introduce moderate vertical viewpoint variation. This produces videos that contain repeated re-observation of objects, changing scale, partial visibility, and viewpoint-dependent appearance changes. 

Evaluation role. HM3D-106 is used to test whether OVS methods can maintain a growing object set over long indoor trajectories. The benchmark stresses object discovery, re-association after absence, and identity stability under loop-closure-like revisits. Since both semantic and instance renderings are available, HM3D also allows us to analyze the effect of reference annotation granularity. Unless otherwise stated, the main HM3D results use the instance-level setting as the primary OVS evaluation, while semantic-level results are reported only as diagnostic robustness analysis in Sec. E.4. 

# C.4 Class-Agnostic Conversion 

All evaluations remove semantic category labels and retain only instance identities. For VIPSeg, this is done by collapsing all panoptic categories into a single foreground entity category before constructing instance maps. For ScanNet and HM3D, reference maps are treated directly as class-agnostic object or instance identities. In all cases, OGA evaluates spatial support and temporal identity structure, not semantic classification. This conversion is essential for OVS because the object set is not assumed to follow a predefined category ontol-ogy. However, it is not sufficient by itself. A class-agnostic metric can still impose a rigid annotation decomposition through 1:1 matching. OGA therefore combines class-agnostic conversion with granularity-agnostic support con-struction, allowing valid predictions to be evaluated even when their semantic decomposition differs from the reference annotation. 

# C.5 Void and Ignore-Region Handling 

OGA separates the core matching rule from the dataset-specific valid evaluation domain Ωt. This is important because different datasets have different annotation completeness and ignore-label conventions. 38 For VIPSeg, ignored pixels are represented as −1 in the in-memory class-agnostic maps used by the evaluator. For ScanNet and HM3D, label 0 is treated as void or background. In datasets with incomplete or partially reconstructed annotations, such as ScanNet, we use a void-tolerant evaluation domain: prediction pixels falling into GT-void regions are excluded from prediction-area and overlap computation. This prevents faithful predictions from being penalized merely because the reference annotation is incomplete. For datasets with more complete annotations, such as HM3D, this tolerance can be reduced or removed by choosing a broader evaluation domain. In this sense, void handling is a dataset policy, not a defining component of GA matching. The GA principle remains the same: predictions are assigned to references by support, and reference objects are scored through coherent dominant fragments. 

# C.6 Frame Sampling and Evaluation Windows 

Long-horizon scene videos can contain hundreds or thousands of frames. To keep evaluation tractable while pre-serving temporal structure, ScanNet and HM3D use adaptive frame sampling. Let T be the number of GT frames in a sequence. The sampling interval is 

∆ = 



1, T ≤ 300 ,

2, 300 < T ≤ 1000 ,

3, 1000 < T ≤ 1500 ,

3, T > 1500 ,

(101) and for T > 1500 we cap evaluation at the first 1500 frames. This sampling preserves long-range trends while avoiding excessive computation on very long sequences. For VPQ, we evaluate multiple temporal scales using sliding windows. Unless otherwise stated, we report k ∈{0, 5, 15 , 25 , 35 , ∞} , where k = 0 corresponds to single-frame PQ and k = ∞ evaluates the full sequence as one window. This allows us to compare short-window segmentation fidelity with long-horizon identity maintenance. 

# D Analysis of Granularity Mismatch 

This section provides additional analysis of the granularity mismatch problem discussed in the main paper. The goal is to clarify why class-agnostic evaluation alone is insufficient for open-world video segmentation. Even when semantic labels are removed, standard metrics still assume that predicted instances and reference instances should follow the same object decomposition. This assumption can incorrectly penalize valid open-world predictions that segment meaningful parts, sub-objects, or alternative object groupings. OGA addresses this issue by treating the annotation as a reference decomposition rather than the only valid de-composition. Under GA matching, multiple predictions may jointly support one reference instance, as long as each prediction remains owned by at most one reference. This allows the evaluation to distinguish granularity mismatch from true segmentation or tracking failure. 

# D.1 Qualitative Failure of Rigid 1:1 Matching on VIPSeg 

VIPSeg provides a useful testbed for visualizing granularity mismatch because it contains standard video panop-tic annotations with annotation-defined object instances. In such benchmarks, a predicted mask may be visually meaningful and temporally stable but still fail under rigid 1:1 matching if it corresponds to a part-level decompo-sition of an annotated object. Figure 7 illustrates this failure mode. A reference object may be decomposed by an open-world method into several coherent prediction identities. Under strict 1:1 matching, at most one prediction can be credited to the reference object. The remaining predictions are treated as unmatched false positives or identity fragments, even if they are spatially contained in the reference object and correspond to semantically meaningful parts. This produces an artificially low score for methods whose granularity differs from the annotation. Under GA matching, these predictions are instead interpreted as a support set for the same reference instance. This does not mean that all fragments are freely credited: the support must satisfy the prediction-side ownership rule, and temporal discontinuities are still handled by dominant-fragment selection. Thus, GA matching relaxes the granularity assumption while preserving identity and temporal constraints. 39 t t + 8 t t + 8 t t + 8 t t + 8

Input 

GT 

Savvy  

> Matching: 1:1

Savvy  

> Matching: n:1

DEVA+SAM  

> Matching: 1:1

DEVA+SAM  

> Matching: n:1

EntitySAM  

> Matching: 1:1

EntitySAM   

> Matching: n:1 Figure 7 Rigid

1:1 matching underestimates valid open-world support. For each VIPSeg example, we show two frames (t, t + 8) ,the GT reference object, and the support credited to each method under rigid 1:1 matching versus GA n:1 matching. Rows labeled 

1:1 and n:1 visualize the support credited by the evaluation rule, not different model predictions. Under 1:1 matching, only one predicted identity can explain the reference object, so valid part-level predictions are discarded from credited support and may be counted as false positives or fragmentation errors. Under GA matching, multiple reference-contained predictions can jointly support the same GT instance while each prediction remains assigned to at most one GT. This exposes the central limitation of class-agnostic but rigid evaluation: even without semantic labels, valid open-world support can be unfairly penalized when its granularity differs from the annotation. 

# D.2 Why Class-Agnostic Evaluation Alone Is Insufficient 

A natural first step for evaluating open-world segmentation is to remove semantic labels and evaluate only in-stance masks. This is necessary, but not sufficient. Class-agnostic evaluation removes the category-classification requirement, but it does not remove the assumption that predictions and annotations must share the same instance granularity. This distinction is important. In a category-aware setting, a method can fail because it assigns the wrong semantic label. In a class-agnostic setting, this failure mode is removed. However, a method can still be penalized if it predicts a valid decomposition that differs from the benchmark’s annotation convention. For example, an open-world method may segment a bicycle into wheels, frame, and handlebar, while the annotation treats the entire bicycle as one instance. These are not necessarily failures of open-world perception; they are failures to match a fixed reference granularity. Rigid 1:1 matching conflates these cases with true errors. If a reference object is supported by several predicted parts, the best-matching part may receive partial credit, while the remaining valid parts become false positives. In this case, the metric penalizes a meaningful part-level decomposition simply because it violates annotation-aligned granularity. It is important, however, to distinguish the two directions of granularity mismatch. The case where multiple predic-tions support one reference instance corresponds to an n:1 relation. This often arises when an open-world method predicts meaningful parts of an annotated object, and is the direction that OGA explicitly relaxes. The converse case, where one prediction overlaps multiple reference instances, corresponds to a 1: n relation. This is less desir-able as a relaxation because it may indicate over-grouping or identity bleeding: a single predicted identity is being shared across multiple annotated objects. For this reason, OGA keeps the reference side as the anchor. Each prediction may be assigned to at most one reference instance, while each reference instance may receive support from multiple predictions. This asymmetric 40 Table 6 OGA results on VIPSeg. Primary OVS fidelity metrics are reported together with structural diagnostics for identity persistence ( IP ) and identity concentration ( IC ).                                                   

> Baseline Fidelity ↑Persistence (IP) ↑Concentration (IC) ↑
> Method VPQ ∞VPQ 0STQ AQ GQ IP PIP GIC PIC G
> VIPSeg
> EntitySAM 59.23 62.61 65.13 49.70 88.43 76.55 60.80 75.85 54.67
> SAM2 51.76 55.91 60.91 51.21 74.62 91.80 51.39 90.55 39.94 DEVA+SAM 53.05 59.35 68.24 54.91 86.59 89.24 65.84 89.03 50.21 Savvy (Ours) 55.35 65.04 72.09 59.01 89.53 90.63 69.48 89.35 45.34

design avoids uncontrolled many-to-many credit assignment. If both directions were relaxed simultaneously, a large ambiguous prediction could be partially credited to many references, and many predictions could also jointly explain each reference. The evaluation graph would become difficult to interpret, and the metric would no longer provide a controlled diagnostic of object identity structure. In short, OGA is granularity-agnostic , but not many-to-many agnostic : it relaxes valid part-to-whole support while preserving reference-anchored ownership. By allowing n:1 support but disallowing unrestricted 1: n credit, OGA separates valid part-level decomposition from identity bleeding and keeps the metric diagnostically meaningful. This design also explains why OGA does not simply make evaluation easier. The GA support rule allows multiple predictions to support the same reference instance when the predictions are sufficiently contained in that refer-ence. At the same time, strict prediction ownership prevents a single prediction from being credited to multiple references. Dominant-fragment selection and fragment-level VPQ penalties further ensure that fragmented or flick-ering support is not over-rewarded. Therefore, OGA changes what is being penalized: granularity mismatch is no longer treated as an automatic failure, while identity bleeding, temporal fragmentation, and unsupported predic-tions remain penalized. This distinction explains the VIPSeg results in the main paper. Methods without benchmark-aligned granularity recover substantially under GA evaluation, because part-level or alternative decompositions are no longer auto-matically discarded. Methods with annotation-aligned granularity benefit less, because their predictions already conform more closely to the rigid 1:1 assumption. The resulting comparison is more informative: it separates benchmark granularity alignment from genuine open-world identity maintenance. 

# E Additional Experimental Results 

# E.1 Full VIPSeg Results 

Table 6 reports the full OGA results on VIPSeg. VIPSeg represents the standard video panoptic setting, where videos contain dynamic objects and cluttered scenes but are still governed by annotation-defined object granularity. Under OGA, Savvy achieves the best STQ, AQ, GQ, and VPQ 0, showing that its object-set maintenance produces strong class-agnostic foreground coverage and association quality. The long-window result is more nuanced. EntitySAM obtains the highest VPQ ∞ and IC G, which is consistent with its coarser, annotation-aligned prediction structure on VIPSeg. This behavior supports our central evaluation ar-gument: VIPSeg remains useful for studying granularity mismatch, but its annotation convention can still favor methods whose prediction granularity is close to the benchmark decomposition. OGA reduces this bias by allowing valid n:1 support, but it does not erase differences in temporal coherence, fragmentation, or annotation alignment. The structural diagnostics further clarify model behavior. Prediction-axis diagnostics such as IP P and IC P measure whether each predicted identity remains concentrated on a small set of reference objects. However, these scores must be interpreted together with the reference-axis diagnostics. High IP P or IC P alone can arise from many pure but short-lived or spatially fragmented predictions, even if each reference object is split across multiple prediction identities. For example, SAM2 achieves the strongest IP P and IC P on VIPSeg, but its lower IP G and IC G indicate weaker reference-side persistence and concentration. Savvy achieves the highest IP G and the strongest primary STQ/AQ scores, suggesting that reference objects receive more persistent support under its maintained object set, even though EntitySAM remains more concentrated on the GT axis under the long-window setting. 41 Table 7 OGA Fidelity Results on ScanNet and HM3D. Primary OVS fidelity metrics and varied VPQ windows. Scores are percentages. 

Fidelity & VPQ Windows ↑

Method VPQ 0 VPQ 5 VPQ 15 VPQ 25 VPQ 35 VPQ ∞ STQ AQ GQ 

EntitySAM 32.31 30.54 28.45 26.85 25.48 10.82 17.65 6.27 61.61 DEVA+SAM 43.58 40.86 39.12 38.05 37.16 18.53 43.15 20.35 95.87 

> ScanNet

Savvy (Ours) 58.48 54.16 51.58 50.12 48.98 28.63 53.93 32.59 91.11 EntitySAM 14.97 13.32 10.92 9.30 8.10 1.46 5.97 0.74 64.37 DEVA+SAM 30.41 28.03 25.68 24.26 23.26 8.47 25.26 6.94 94.81 

> HM3D

Savvy (Ours) 46.77 42.97 39.48 37.64 36.41 19.59 35.69 14.28 91.26   

> Table 8 OGA Structural Diagnostics on ScanNet and HM3D. Structural diagnostics for identity persistence ( IP ), identity concen-tration ( IC ), and temporal patterns. Scores are percentages.
> Persistence & Concentration

↑ Clustering & Patterns ↑                                                        

> Method IP PIP GIC PIC GClust. Patt 1Patt 2Patt 3
> EntitySAM 24.93 17.31 9.02 19.19 26.65 25.91 1.88 0.18 DEVA+SAM 63.21 50.38 54.82 25.90 43.09 40.06 12.82 5.63
> ScanNet
> Savvy (Ours) 75.44 57.92 62.68 32.03 65.71 58.67 20.58 9.50
> EntitySAM 8.36 5.80 14.46 15.06 4.74 4.69 0.12 0.01 DEVA+SAM 35.55 26.11 74.56 26.57 14.59 14.27 2.27 0.67
> HM3D
> Savvy (Ours) 53.15 37.07 74.46 32.16 27.32 25.59 3.75 1.16

# E.2 Full ScanNet Results 

Table 7 reports the full OGA fidelity results on ScanNet. ScanNet represents the long-horizon indoor exploration setting, where strong ego-motion, repeated re-observation, and incomplete reconstruction make persistent object maintenance substantially more difficult than in short panoptic videos. Across all VPQ windows, Savvy achieves the strongest performance. In particular, Savvy improves VPQ ∞ from 18.53 to 28.63 over DEVA+SAM and from 10.82 to 28.63 over EntitySAM. Savvy also achieves the best STQ and AQ, indicating stronger long-horizon association quality under GA evaluation. DEVA+SAM obtains the highest GQ on ScanNet, which suggests strong foreground coverage over the valid region. However, its lower AQ and VPQ ∞ indicate that this coverage does not translate into equally strong long-range identity maintenance. EntitySAM performs substantially worse on ScanNet, especially in AQ and VPQ ∞, reflecting the difficulty of applying a fixed-query, annotation-aligned segmentation style to long scene-centric videos with many re-observations. Table 8 provides the corresponding structural diagnostics. Prediction-axis diagnostics measure whether predicted identities remain pure, while reference-axis diagnostics measure whether GT objects remain whole. Both axes are necessary: high IP P or IC P alone can be misleading, because a method may produce many short-lived or spatially fragmented predictions that each remain pure with respect to one GT while still splitting that GT across many identities. Savvy achieves the best scores on both prediction-side and reference-side diagnostics, indicating that its identities are not only relatively pure on the prediction axis, but also provide more persistent and compact support for reference objects. Its gains on IP G, IC G, Cluster, and Patt k show that the improved prediction-side purity is accompanied by stronger reference-side persistence and temporal organization. The size-stratified results in Table 9 further show that Savvy’s advantage is not limited to large objects. The di-agnostics should again be read jointly across axes: prediction-side purity alone does not guarantee good object maintenance unless it is accompanied by reference-side persistence and concentration. Savvy obtains the best structural diagnostics on medium and large objects across all reported measures, and also improves most small-object diagnostics. The only exception is IP G for small objects, where DEVA+SAM is slightly higher. However, Savvy remains stronger on small-object IP P , IC P , IC G, Cluster, and Patt k, suggesting cleaner and more temporally orga-nized support even in the difficult small-object regime. 42 Table 9 Size-Stratified OGA Structural Diagnostics on ScanNet. Performance broken down by object size: Small ( S), Medium ( M), and Large ( L).  

> Persistence & Concentration

↑ Clustering & Patterns Method Size IP p IP g IC p IC g Clust. Patt 1 Patt 2 Patt 3                                                                             

> S0.75 10.90 0.26 6.42 1.66 1.65 0.00 0.00 EntitySAM M7.82 11.74 1.80 13.60 8.56 8.29 0.48 0.01 L25.67 20.21 9.97 21.85 37.15 35.97 2.84 0.31 S58.88 54.37 54.08 16.17 7.22 7.07 0.59 0.02 DEVA+SAM M66.59 50.40 59.25 34.21 29.09 27.83 5.69 1.66 L65.81 49.92 53.76 22.10 52.45 48.09 17.30 8.14 S69.66 48.03 62.03 24.07 12.55 11.44 2.25 0.42
> Savvy (Ours) M78.30 55.12 66.34 44.50 51.37 48.01 10.43 3.59
> L81.44 59.79 62.83 25.66 76.12 66.57 26.79 13.15
> Table 10 Size-Stratified OGA Structural Diagnostics on HM3D. Performance broken down by object size: Small ( S), Medium ( M), and Large ( L). Scores are percentages.
> Persistence & Concentration

↑ Clustering & Patterns ↑                                                                                    

> Method Size IP PIP GIC PIC GClust. Patt 1Patt 2Patt 3
> S0.05 5.43 0.08 1.94 0.28 0.28 0.00 0.00 EntitySAM M3.60 4.57 4.46 20.18 4.42 4.37 0.12 0.00 L8.30 9.16 15.48 54.86 22.67 22.41 0.57 0.05 S35.54 26.29 79.86 13.09 3.33 3.32 0.07 0.01 DEVA+SAM M36.61 25.72 78.55 47.32 23.50 23.23 2.67 0.59 L34.18 26.01 67.04 33.28 38.59 36.93 9.86 3.46 S53.25 33.40 82.95 16.08 7.77 7.69 0.25 0.02
> Savvy (Ours) M53.74 40.63 77.58 58.46 44.35 42.70 4.92 1.05
> L51.97 42.03 63.36 37.72 66.62 58.09 14.58 5.71

# E.3 Full HM3D Results 

Table 7 also reports the full OGA fidelity results on HM3D. HM3D complements ScanNet with cleaner long-horizon in-door scenes and more complete reconstruction. Savvy achieves the strongest performance across all VPQ windows, STQ, and AQ. On VPQ 0, Savvy reaches 46.77, compared with 30.41 for DEVA+SAM and 14.97 for EntitySAM. The advantage remains consistent over longer windows: on VPQ ∞, Savvy obtains 19.59, compared with 8.47 for DEVA+SAM and 1.46 for EntitySAM. Savvy also achieves the best STQ and AQ, indicating stronger object-level support and association quality under long-horizon evaluation. As on ScanNet, DEVA+SAM obtains the highest GQ, indicating strong foreground coverage over the valid evaluation region. However, its lower AQ and VPQ ∞ show that this foreground coverage does not translate into equally strong identity maintenance over long temporal horizons. EntitySAM is substantially weaker on HM3D, especially on AQ and long-window VPQ, suggesting that its coarse partitions and limited object-set expansion are insufficient for long-horizon indoor OVS. Table 8 provides the corresponding structural diagnostics. Savvy obtains the strongest IP P , IP G, IC G, Cluster, and Patt k scores, while DEVA+SAM is marginally higher on IC P . This is consistent with the interpretation of prediction-axis concentration: high IC P alone does not necessarily indicate better object maintenance, since a method can produce individually pure but fragmented predictions while still failing to keep reference objects whole. Savvy’s gains on IP G, IC G, Cluster, and Patt k show that its predicted identities provide more persistent, compact, and tem-porally connected support for reference objects. Thus, its improvement is not merely prediction-side purity, but stronger reference-side object maintenance. The size-stratified HM3D results in Table 10 show that Savvy’s advantage holds across small, medium, and large objects, although the diagnostic pattern varies by size. For small objects, Savvy improves both prediction-side and reference-side persistence and concentration, and obtains the strongest temporal diagnostics. For medium objects, Savvy leads IP P , IP G, IC G, Cluster, and Patt k, while DEVA+SAM is slightly higher on IC P ; this isolated prediction-axis advantage should be read together with DEVA+SAM’s lower IP G and temporal-pattern scores. For large objects, Enti-tySAM obtains the highest IC G, but this does not indicate better long-horizon object maintenance. Since EntitySAM 43 Table 11 HM3D robustness under semantic versus instance annotation granularity. Scores are percentages. Changing the reference granularity affects all methods, but Savvy remains strongest on the primary OVS fidelity metrics under both semantic and instance annotations.                                                                       

> Method GT granularity VPQ 0VPQ ∞STQ AQ GQ IP PIP GIC PIC G
> Savvy Semantic 65.98 22.12 48.93 25.91 93.01 89.71 60.80 87.28 34.55 Savvy Instance 55.52 28.21 44.50 21.53 93.01 67.52 53.95 80.84 39.28 EntitySAM Semantic 36.65 14.65 24.04 7.95 75.55 27.95 15.77 19.04 10.89 EntitySAM Instance 18.71 2.90 10.28 1.52 75.55 10.16 8.63 27.76 18.99 DEVA+SAM Semantic 44.86 11.21 32.76 11.35 96.24 66.41 43.31 64.44 20.20 DEVA+SAM Instance 32.66 9.36 26.15 7.26 96.24 33.12 25.70 78.08 29.56

remains much lower on IP P , IP G, Cluster, and Patt k, the high IC G is better interpreted as a coarse blobbing effect: a small number of broad prediction identities touch each large GT region, increasing reference-side concentration, while failing to maintain persistent and temporally organized object support. This behavior is also visible in the qualitative results, where EntitySAM often produces coarse partitions with limited object-set expansion. Overall, the size breakdown reinforces the same conclusion as the aggregate diagnostics: Savvy provides stronger reference-side persistence and temporal organization across object scales. 

# E.4 Robustness to HM3D Annotation Granularity 

We additionally evaluate how OGA results change under different HM3D reference granularities. This analysis is included as a diagnostic robustness check rather than as the primary HM3D setting. Semantic-level annotations collapse multiple physical instances into coarser reference regions, thereby weakening the identity-maintenance requirement that is central to OVS. As a result, semantic-level evaluation can artificially benefit methods with coarser predictions or weaker instance-level object management, since merging or reusing identities across objects of the same semantic type is less strongly penalized. For this reason, we use the instance-level HM3D setting as the primary OVS evaluation setting, and report semantic-level results only to analyze sensitivity to annotation granularity. This granularity comparison is evaluated on a controlled 10-scan subset selected from our 106-scan HM3D bench-mark, which is collected from 36 validation scenes with complete metadata; details of the subset construction are provided in Sec. C.3. The subset is chosen to reduce confounding from incomplete sequence metadata or severe method failure, so that the comparison more directly reflects the effect of reference annotation granularity. Table 11 compares results under semantic and instance reference decompositions. Changing the reference gran-ularity affects all methods, confirming that OVS evaluation is sensitive to how the reference object set is defined. The shift to instance-level GT reduces most fidelity and persistence scores, but the magnitude differs sharply across methods. EntitySAM drops most severely, with VPQ 0 falling from 36.65 to 18.71, VPQ ∞ from 14.65 to 2.90, and STQ from 24.04 to 10.28, indicating that its coarse partitions benefit substantially from semantic-level reference col-lapse. DEVA+SAM also drops under instance GT, especially in IP P and IP G. Savvy is affected as well, but remains substantially stronger than both baselines on VPQ 0, VPQ ∞, STQ, and AQ. Interestingly, IC G increases for all meth-ods under instance GT. This does not contradict the fidelity drop: finer reference objects can reduce the number of prediction IDs touching each individual GT, increasing concentration, while the overall task becomes harder in terms of persistence and object-level fidelity. Despite this change in reference decomposition, Savvy remains strongest on the primary OVS fidelity metrics under both settings. This suggests that Savvy’s advantage is not tied to one particular HM3D annotation convention. The comparison also illustrates why instance-level evaluation is more appropriate for OVS: it better exposes whether a method can maintain distinct object identities rather than merely cover broad semantic regions. Semantic-level results are therefore useful for diagnosing annotation-granularity sensitivity, but they should not replace instance-level evaluation when the goal is open-world object maintenance. 

# E.5 Additional Ablation Studies 

The main paper reports module-level ablations for Savvy, including HMD, deferred admission, and track consolida-tion. Here, we provide additional sensitivity studies for system-level parameters and OGA metric thresholds. These experiments are intended to test whether the conclusions are robust to reasonable parameter changes, rather than tied to a brittle default configuration. Unless otherwise stated, all ablations in this subsection are run on the same randomly sampled 20% subset of 44 ScanNet validation scenes. Due to GPU-level nondeterminism and runs being distributed across different A6000 servers, small numerical discrepancies from the main-paper table may occur; we focus on consistent trends rather than decimal-level differences. 

Savvy parameter sensitivity. Table 12 studies four implementation parameters: discovery stride s, transient-buffer window B, competition margin δ, and appearance self-consistency threshold τapp . These parameters control dif-ferent tradeoffs in the semi-online pipeline. The discovery stride determines how frequently HMD is invoked for new-object discovery; the transient window controls how long a newly discovered candidate must accumulate evi-dence before promotion; the competition margin controls how decisive the appearance-score gap must be before one established track suppresses another in overlap arbitration; and the appearance threshold controls how strict Savvy is when accepting long-gap reappearances. For discovery stride, we evaluate s ∈ { 1, 3, 5}. A smaller stride invokes HMD more frequently, which slightly im-proves short-window fidelity, STQ, AQ, and GQ. However, the default s = 3 achieves the best VPQ ∞, IP P , and IC P ,while s = 5 gives only a small further improvement on IC G. This indicates that more frequent discovery is not always better: dense discovery can improve immediate coverage, but can also introduce more proposal pressure for de-ferred admission and consolidation. The default stride provides a good balance between discovery responsiveness and long-horizon identity stability. For the transient window, we evaluate B ∈ { 15 , 30 , 60 }. The results are highly stable across this range. A shorter window ( B = 15 ) slightly improves VPQ 0, IP P , and IC P , suggesting faster admission and more responsive short-term discovery. A longer window ( B = 60 ) slightly improves VPQ ∞, GQ, and IP G, suggesting more conservative admission and stronger long-range reference-side support. The default B = 30 remains close to the best across all metrics while avoiding the additional runtime cost of B = 60 , which is substantially slower in practice. For competition arbitration, we vary the competition margin δ ∈ { 0, 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 }. The zero-margin setting is clearly worse on VPQ ∞, STQ, and AQ, indicating that suppressing tracks based on negligible appearance-score differences can harm long-range consistency. Once a nonzero margin is used, performance becomes stable. The default δ = 0 .10 is close to the best setting and obtains the strongest VPQ ∞ among the tested margins, while larger margins yield only marginal changes. This supports the use of a conservative margin in competition arbitration: the system should suppress a competing track only when the evidence is sufficiently separated. For appearance self-consistency, we vary τapp ∈ {−∞ , 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4}, where τapp = −∞ disables the reappear-ance gate. Disabling the gate substantially lowers VPQ ∞, STQ, AQ, IP G, and IC G, showing that long-gap appearance verification is important for preventing incorrect identity revival. In contrast, thresholds from 0.0 to 0.2 produce nearly identical results, and even τapp = 0 .4 remains broadly stable with a small drop in AQ. This suggests that the benefit comes from having a reappearance consistency gate, rather than from a finely tuned threshold. The larger gaps in some sensitivity rows should not be interpreted as contradicting the module-level ablation in Table 3. The two studies test different regimes. The module-level ablation compares coherent pipeline variants: when track consolidation is disabled, both appearance self-consistency and competition arbitration are removed together, yielding a weaker but internally consistent pipeline. In contrast, the hyperparameter sweep perturbs one consolidation subroutine while leaving the other active. This can produce sharper drops because the remaining subroutine may act on a degraded object set. For example, when τapp = −∞ , incorrect long-gap reappearances are no longer filtered, but competition arbitration can still treat them as valid competitors and suppress other tracks. Conversely, when δ = 0 , arbitration becomes overly sensitive to small appearance-score differences and may suppress tracks based on noisy evidence. Thus, the larger drops in the sensitivity table reflect subroutine interaction under miscalibrated settings, rather than contradiction with the module-level ablation. Overall, Savvy benefits incrementally from its modules, remains stable under reasonable hyperparameter choices, and degrades mainly when a safeguard is disabled or made overly aggressive. Overall, Table 12 shows that Savvy is robust across reasonable parameter choices. The default configuration is not always the best on every individual diagnostic, but it is consistently near the top while balancing short-window cov-erage, long-window identity maintenance, and computational cost. The larger drops occur mainly when a mech-anism is effectively disabled or made overly aggressive, such as using no appearance gate or zero competition margin. 45 Table 12 Savvy system-parameter sensitivity. We vary discovery stride, transient-buffer window, competition margin, and ap-pearance self-consistency threshold. Bold indicates the default configuration; shaded cells indicate the best score within each ablation group. Savvy remains stable across reasonable parameter choices, while degenerate settings such as disabling appear-ance gating or using zero competition margin reduce long-window consistency. 

Ablation Value VPQ 0 VPQ ∞ STQ AQ GQ IP P IP G IC P IC G

Disc. stride s 1 59.15 30.42 56.61 34.95 92.83 72.63 58.74 60.27 31.02 Disc. stride s 3 58.53 31.30 55.97 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 Disc. stride s 5 57.82 31.24 55.53 34.47 90.93 71.70 57.57 60.05 32.02 Trans. win. B 15 58.81 30.15 55.73 34.49 91.56 73.07 57.63 61.49 31.32 Trans. win. B 30 58.53 31.30 55.97 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 Trans. win. B 60 58.38 31.74 55.95 34.75 91.66 73.02 58.46 60.92 31.43 Comp. margin δ 0 58.56 26.13 54.78 33.42 91.62 72.68 57.64 60.54 31.24 Comp. margin δ 0.05 58.54 30.65 55.78 34.54 91.60 72.91 58.02 60.95 31.38 Comp. margin δ 0.10 58.53 31.30 55.97 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 Comp. margin δ 0.15 58.55 31.20 55.95 34.74 91.58 72.96 57.95 61.18 31.61 Comp. margin δ 0.2 58.55 31.27 55.99 34.78 91.57 72.92 57.96 61.18 31.62 Appr. threshold τapp −∞ 58.55 27.20 54.44 33.27 91.61 72.71 57.18 60.38 31.09 Appr. threshold τapp 0.0 58.53 31.28 55.72 34.68 91.59 72.89 57.97 61.16 31.42 Appr. threshold τapp 0.1 58.53 31.30 55.97 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 Appr. threshold τapp 0.2 58.54 31.30 55.97 34.77 91.58 72.95 58.01 61.17 31.51 Appr. threshold τapp 0.4 58.53 31.29 55.66 34.03 91.57 72.94 58.01 61.18 31.51     

> Note: τapp =−∞ disables appearance self-consistency gating.

OGA metric sensitivity. We also evaluate whether OGA is sensitive to the prediction-support threshold τios and the sever threshold τsever . Table 13 shows that the main conclusions are stable across these settings. Varying τios 

has little effect on the primary fidelity metrics, indicating that the reported VPQ, STQ, AQ, and GQ trends are not driven by a brittle support-admissibility threshold. Its main effect appears in the structural diagnostics: stricter thresholds remove weaker support relations, which can increase IC by sparsifying the prediction–reference support graph, while slightly changing IP by altering the admitted support mass. The sever threshold has the expected temporal effect. Since severing only changes how support chains are split into dominant fragments, it leaves single-frame VPQ 0 and GQ unchanged, while affecting VPQ ∞, STQ, and AQ. A lower threshold is more permissive and allows longer support chains to remain intact, whereas a higher threshold more aggressively splits identity transitions and lowers long-window scores. For example, Savvy’s VPQ ∞ changes from 32.90 at τsever = 0 .3 to 31.30 at the default τsever = 0 .5 and 27.86 at τsever = 0 .7, reflecting the increasing strictness of temporal coherence. EntitySAM shows almost no sensitivity to τsever , and only limited sensitivity to τios on the primary metrics. This near-invariance should be read as a structural signature rather than an advantage. As also seen in the qualitative results in Appendix H, EntitySAM rarely produces many fine-grained fragments or frequent new object discoveries; its predictions are largely coarse and aligned with large foreground or stuff-like regions. Consequently, its support chains contain few identity transitions, so changing the sever threshold has little effect. In contrast, methods that actively discover finer objects expose more support relations and temporal transitions, making OGA thresholds more diagnostic of their identity structure. Overall, Savvy remains the strongest method across the tested threshold settings, supporting that the OGA con-clusions are robust to reasonable changes in both support admissibility and temporal severing. The threshold sensitivity study also confirms the intended behavior of OGA: τios primarily controls which prediction–reference support relations are admitted, while τsever controls how strictly temporal identity discontinuities are penalized. 

# F Synthetic Stress-Test Protocol and Results 

The main paper reports synthetic stress tests for OGA under controlled perturbations. Here we provide the implementation-level definitions of these perturbations and the complete quantitative results. These tests are not intended to model a complete distribution of real failures. Instead, each perturbation isolates one structural failure mode so that we can verify whether OGA diagnostics respond selectively. The perturbations are implemented directly on prediction label maps before evaluation, while the GT remains unchanged. 46 Table 13 OGA metric-threshold sensitivity. We vary the prediction-support threshold τios and the sever threshold τsever . Rows with τ = 0 .5 correspond to the default configuration, and shaded cells mark deviation from the default. The method ranking and main conclusions remain stable across reasonable threshold choices. 

Method Threshold Value VPQ 0 VPQ ∞ STQ AQ GQ IP P IP G IC P IC G

EntitySAM τios 0.3 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 27.29 19.57 9.50 21.40 

τios 0.5 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 26.24 18.82 11.44 20.29 

τios 0.7 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 24.88 17.89 11.71 19.41 

τsever 0.3 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 26.24 18.82 11.44 20.29 

τsever 0.5 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 26.24 18.82 11.44 20.29 

τsever 0.7 33.53 13.09 20.77 8.83 62.92 26.24 18.82 11.44 20.29 DEVA+SAM τios 0.3 44.71 20.50 44.46 21.70 96.37 63.19 51.52 49.98 25.67 

τios 0.5 44.71 20.50 44.46 21.70 96.37 63.19 51.52 49.98 25.67 

τios 0.7 44.71 21.16 44.51 21.74 96.37 60.71 49.41 52.97 25.57 

τsever 0.3 44.71 21.16 44.51 21.74 96.37 60.71 49.41 52.97 25.57 

τsever 0.5 44.71 20.50 44.46 21.70 96.37 63.19 51.52 49.98 25.67 

τsever 0.7 44.71 19.40 44.11 21.29 96.37 60.71 49.41 52.97 25.57 Savvy τios 0.3 58.53 31.30 55.52 34.77 91.59 73.40 58.36 56.09 28.70 

τios 0.5 58.53 31.30 55.52 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 

τios 0.7 58.53 31.30 55.52 34.77 91.59 71.11 56.64 63.30 33.23 

τsever 0.3 58.53 32.90 55.92 35.25 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.51 

τsever 0.5 58.53 31.30 55.52 34.77 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.61 

τsever 0.7 58.53 27.86 54.60 33.71 91.59 72.95 58.02 61.16 31.51 

Temporal dropout. Temporal dropout removes prediction support intermittently. For each predicted identity present in a frame, its pixels are independently replaced by the ignore label with probability pdrop . This preserves the re-maining identity labels but creates missing temporal support. As shown in Table 14, dropout strongly reduces VPQ ∞,STQ, AQ, and GQ as severity increases. This is expected: the perturbation removes visible support, so both fore-ground coverage and long-window association degrade. IP G also decreases because each reference object receives less persistent support from the prediction set. 

Macro sever. Macro sever simulates low-frequency permanent identity replacement. For each eligible track whose lifespan exceeds a minimum length, the track is split into large temporal chunks by scheduling one or more cut points. After each cut point, the original identity is remapped to a fresh identity for subsequent frames. This preserves spatial masks but breaks long-range identity continuity. In Table 14, VPQ 0 and GQ remain unchanged under sever because the per-frame masks are preserved. In contrast, VPQ ∞, STQ, AQ, IP G, and IC G degrade sharply, showing that OGA detects the identity fragmentation even when spatial segmentation is unchanged. 

Sparse flicker. Sparse flicker simulates high-frequency identity pollution. For each eligible track, a small fraction of its frames are selected subject to a minimum temporal gap, and the object’s ID is replaced by a fresh hallucinated ID only on those isolated frames. This preserves spatial masks while injecting short-lived identity fragments. The results show an even stronger separation between spatial fidelity and identity structure: VPQ 0 and GQ remain fixed, but VPQ ∞, STQ, AQ, and IC G collapse rapidly. Notably, IP P and IC P increase under flicker and sever. This does not mean the prediction structure improves. Rather, the newly created short-lived IDs are often locally pure with respect to one reference object, so prediction-axis purity/concentration can appear high while the reference side degrades. The tandem behavior of IP P /IC P with IP G/IC G is therefore essential: high prediction-axis scores alone can indicate many pure fragments, whereas the GT-axis scores expose that each reference object is being split across many identities. 

Spatial clutter. Spatial clutter is implemented by dynamically dilating each predicted instance mask using area-dependent kernel sizes and iteration counts. In the aggressive settings, the dilated mask may overwrite other labeled regions or compete through majority voting among overlapping dilations. This perturbation targets spatial overreach and inter-object interference. Unlike sever or flicker, clutter changes the spatial masks themselves. Ac-cordingly, Table 14 shows broad degradation across VPQ 0, VPQ ∞, STQ, AQ, IP, and IC. Interestingly, GQ increases with 47 Table 14 Stress test of OGA metrics across synthetic failure modes. We evaluate OGA under controlled perturbations at in-creasing severity levels. The metrics respond selectively: dropout mainly removes support, sever and flicker preserve spatial masks but break identity continuity, clutter degrades spatial and identity structure broadly, and void-only expansion has limited negative effect under void-tolerant evaluation. 

Failure Mode Severity VPQ 0 VPQ ∞ STQ AQ GQ IP P IP G IC P IC G

Clutter 1 58.18 30.96 57.11 35.36 95.25 72.34 59.56 60.62 31.17 2 55.93 29.05 55.98 33.49 96.53 71.34 59.14 59.93 30.61 4 49.20 23.25 51.84 28.40 97.75 68.52 56.31 57.58 29.00 8 41.01 11.65 43.56 20.63 98.12 62.88 50.65 52.88 25.78 Dropout 0.05 56.32 10.03 44.26 23.27 87.01 72.07 54.52 60.62 31.30 0.10 54.13 6.26 39.20 19.28 82.81 71.11 51.25 60.22 30.97 0.15 51.81 4.26 35.11 16.42 78.23 69.88 47.41 59.22 30.22 0.20 49.16 2.94 30.99 13.73 73.26 68.50 43.54 58.48 29.91 Flicker 0.025 58.53 2.72 36.10 14.54 91.59 74.65 56.58 75.22 16.78 0.050 58.53 0.71 28.54 9.13 91.59 75.16 55.20 78.28 12.15 0.075 58.53 0.38 23.74 6.77 91.59 75.42 53.79 79.39 10.28 0.100 58.53 0.05 18.94 4.05 91.59 75.68 52.37 80.91 8.41 Sever 1 58.53 13.11 44.94 22.54 91.59 73.84 44.44 68.93 21.84 2 58.53 7.03 40.29 17.97 91.59 74.33 38.77 72.08 18.57 3 58.53 5.09 37.36 15.53 91.59 74.59 35.47 74.31 16.81 4 58.53 3.15 34.43 11.29 91.59 74.72 34.54 76.62 16.56 Void 1 58.64 31.57 57.57 35.94 95.25 72.21 59.89 61.07 31.51 2 58.46 31.56 58.15 36.21 96.53 71.86 60.70 60.89 31.50 4 57.99 31.37 58.49 36.20 97.75 71.49 61.42 60.88 31.41 8 57.28 30.99 59.17 36.12 98.53 70.75 62.86 60.86 31.23 

clutter because more valid foreground pixels are covered by prediction foreground. This confirms that GQ alone is not sufficient: excessive spatial expansion can improve foreground coverage while harming identity structure and region fidelity. 

Void-only expansion. Void-only expansion uses the same dynamic dilation mechanism, but restricts newly added pixels to locations that are currently assigned to the ignore label in the prediction map. This perturbation tests whether the evaluator unfairly penalizes predictions that expand into unannotated or void regions. Under a void-tolerant evaluation policy, this expansion has limited negative effect because prediction pixels falling into GT-void regions are excluded from valid prediction-area and overlap accounting. The results match this expectation: VPQ 0,VPQ ∞, and IC remain nearly stable, while GQ increases because more valid foreground is covered. This verifies that the void-tolerant policy avoids penalizing harmless spill into annotation-void regions. Overall, the stress tests validate the diagnostic design of OGA. Spatial perturbations, missing-support perturbations, and identity-only perturbations produce different metric signatures. In particular, sever and flicker demonstrate why IP and IC must be read on both axes: prediction-side scores may remain high or even increase when many short-lived fragments are locally pure, while reference-side IP and IC reveal fragmentation of the underlying GT object. This selective behavior is the intended outcome of OGA: the metric suite does not collapse all failures into one score, but separates foreground coverage, long-horizon association, prediction-side purity, reference-side fragmentation, and void-region tolerance. 

# G OGA Visualization Protocol 

Beyond scalar OGA metrics, we use two complementary visual diagnostics to inspect the prediction–reference sup-port structure induced by each method. The support matrix provides a direct, instance-level view of how prediction identities overlap with reference objects within a sequence, making fragmentation, merging, and off-diagonal leak-age visually explicit. The identity-concentration typology then summarizes the same structural behavior across scenes by placing each sequence in the IC P –IC G space. Together, these visualizations help distinguish whether a method obtains strong scores through a compact and stable object set, or through fragmented, redundant, or entangled support patterns. 48 Savvy DEVA+SAM EntitySAM 

> 0.0
> 1.0
> 0.5

Figure 8 Prediction–reference support matrices for long-horizon object identity structure. We visualize sequence-level support between prediction identities and reference instances for Savvy, DEVA+SAM, and EntitySAM on ScanNet scene0019_00 . The top row normalizes overlap mass by reference area, Mp,g /B g , showing how each reference instance is covered by prediction identities. The bottom row normalizes by prediction area, Mp,g /A p, showing how each prediction identity distributes its support over reference instances. Savvy produces a sparse, concentrated structure, indicating compact object identities with limited bleeding or fragmentation. DEVA+SAM shows a noisier pattern with more scattered off-diagonal support. EntitySAM exhibits a small number of broad prediction identities spanning many references, revealing under-discovery and identity merging despite apparently high local support. 

# G.1 Support Matrices 

We visualize the prediction–reference support matrix at the sequence level. For each video, we first accumulate the overlap mass between every prediction identity pi and every reference instance gj :

Mi,j = ∑

> t

|pi,t ∩ gj,t |. (102) Prediction pixels falling into void or unlabeled reference regions are ignored, consistent with the void-tolerant evaluation protocol used in our metrics. We then visualize two normalized versions of this overlap matrix: 

W Pi,j = Mi,j 

Api + ε , Api = ∑

> t

|pi,t |, (103) and 

W Gi,j = Mi,j 

Bgj + ε , Bgj = ∑

> t

|gj,t |. (104) The prediction-normalized matrix W P measures the purity of each prediction identity: a clean prediction should concentrate its mass on a single reference instance. The reference-normalized matrix W G measures how each reference object is covered by predictions: a compact object representation should receive support from a small number of prediction identities. Thus, W P is more directly related to prediction-side identity bleeding, while W G

is more directly related to reference-side coverage and fragmentation. To make the matrix visually interpretable, we sort rows and columns according to the dominant reference assign-ment. Specifically, we first sort reference columns by their total overlap mass, 

sj = ∑

> i

Mi,j , (105) in descending order. This places the most visible or most strongly supported reference instances earlier in the matrix. Given this ordered set of reference columns, each prediction identity pi is assigned a dominant reference 49 index 

d(i) = arg max  

> j

Mi,j , (106) where the index j is taken after the reference-column ordering. Prediction rows are then sorted lexicographically by their dominant reference d(i) and, within the same dominant reference group, by their dominant overlap mass 

mi = max  

> j

Mi,j , (107) in descending order. This produces a block-diagonal layout when predictions are well organized: predictions ex-plaining the same reference object are placed close together, and references with strong support appear as compact local structures. This sorting is used only for visualization and does not affect the evaluation metrics. Its purpose is to expose structural patterns that are otherwise difficult to see under arbitrary identity numbering. A sparse near-diagonal pattern indicates compact and well-separated object identities. Tall columns indicate reference-side fragmentation, where one reference instance is split across multiple prediction identities. Wide rows indicate prediction-side bleeding, where one prediction identity supports multiple reference objects. Weak isolated off-diagonal entries usually correspond to minor overlap leakage, whereas dense off-diagonal bands or repeated horizontal structures indicate systematic identity merging. In Fig. 8, we use the transposed reference–prediction layout, where rows correspond to reference instances and columns correspond to prediction identities. 

Observed structures. Savvy produces a sparse and concentrated support structure in both normalizations, with most reference instances explained by compact prediction identities and limited off-diagonal support. DEVA+SAM preserves a partially diagonal structure but exhibits more scattered off-diagonal activations, suggesting noisier association and occasional identity leakage. EntitySAM shows a qualitatively different failure mode: only a small number of prediction identities support many reference instances, producing broad horizontal structures in the reference–prediction view. This pattern indicates under-discovery and identity merging, where coarse prediction identities are shared across multiple objects rather than forming a persistent object-level set. 

# G.2 Identity-Concentration Typology 

The prediction–reference support matrix in Appendix G.1 provides a direct visualization of the support structure for individual scenes. We further summarize this structure across scenes using an identity-concentration typology based on IC P and IC G. This view is complementary to the support matrix: instead of showing the full many-to-many relation for one sequence, it places each evaluated scene into a two-dimensional behavior space. The horizontal axis, IC P , measures prediction-axis concentration. A high IC P indicates that each prediction identity is structurally attached to only a small number of reference instances, while a low value indicates prediction-side bleeding or merging, where the same prediction identity becomes valid support for multiple reference objects. The vertical axis, IC G, measures reference-axis concentration. A high IC G indicates that each reference object is supported by a compact set of prediction identities, while a low value indicates reference-side fragmentation, where many prediction IDs participate in supporting the same object. This yields a simple qualitative typology. The upper-right region corresponds to compact, near-isomorphic support: prediction identities remain object-specific, and reference objects are not split across many predictions. The lower-right region indicates reference-side fragmentation or shattering: prediction identities may remain relatively pure, but individual reference objects are supported by many IDs over time. The upper-left region indicates prediction-side bleeding or merging: reference objects may be compactly covered, but prediction identities are shared across multiple objects. The lower-left region corresponds to entangled many-to-many support, where both prediction-side and reference-side concentration are weak. As shown in Fig. 9, Savvy occupies the high-concentration regime more consistently than the baselines. This indi-cates that its identity set is not only accurate in terms of overlap mass, but also structurally compact: predictions tend to remain attached to individual objects, and references tend to be explained by fewer prediction identities. DEVA+SAM shifts toward lower IC G, suggesting stronger reference-side fragmentation despite moderate prediction-side concentration. EntitySAM clusters in the low-concentration regime, consistent with under-discovery and coarse 50 Figure 9 Identity-concentration typology on ScanNet. We visualize scene-level identity structure by plotting prediction-axis con-centration ( IC P ) against reference-axis concentration ( IC G). High IC P indicates that prediction identities remain attached to a small number of reference objects, while high IC G indicates that reference objects are supported by a compact set of prediction identities, spatiotemporally. Thus, the upper-right region represents compact, near-isomorphic support with limited prediction-side bleeding and limited reference-side fragmentation. Savvy consistently lies in this compact-support regime. DEVA+SAM shifts toward lower IC G, indicating stronger reference-side fragmentation. EntitySAM clusters in the low-concentration regime, consistent with under-discovery and broad prediction identities that induce entangled many-to-many support. 

prediction identities that create entangled many-to-many support. Together with the support-matrix visualization, this analysis shows that Savvy’s gains are not merely due to relaxed granularity under OGA, but reflect a cleaner organization of object identities over long horizons. 51 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 10 Long-horizon qualitative results on a ScanNet sequence (1). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. Early frames show couches and chairs, the camera then moves through a corridor-like region with doors, trash bins, and a vending machine, and later returns to the seating area. Savvy maintains a more detailed and consistent object decomposition across these transitions: chairs, couch regions, doors, bins, vending-machine surfaces, walls, and floor regions remain separated with relatively stable identities as the camera viewpoint changes. DEVA+SAM often produces broad foreground coverage, but local object structure is unstable: chair backs and seats blob into nearby furniture, object boundaries bleed into floors or walls, and several thin or adjacent structures are absorbed into large regions. EntitySAM produces coarse partitions with limited new-object discovery; large surfaces remain stable, but newly encountered objects such as chairs, bins, door-side structures, and vending-machine details are often missed, collapsed into background-like regions, or assigned to identities that drift from earlier objects. This example illustrates the long-horizon OVS challenge: good performance requires not only segmenting visible foreground, but also expanding the object set when new objects appear, preserving fine object boundaries, and maintaining identities when the camera leaves and later revisits the same scene regions. 

52 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 11 Long-horizon qualitative results on a ScanNet sequence (2). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera first observes a seating/table area, then moves through a wider room region with multiple tables and chairs, and later revisits furniture from different viewpoints. Savvy maintains a more detailed and temporally consistent object decomposition across the sequence: tables, chairs, sofa/couch regions, stools, and surrounding floor/wall structures remain separated as the camera moves and revisits previously seen areas. DEVA+SAM often provides broad foreground coverage, but its local structure is unstable: nearby objects blob together, chair legs and table boundaries bleed into adjacent surfaces, and thin structures are frequently smeared or inconsistently split across frames. EntitySAM produces coarse partitions that appear stable at the surface level, but its new-object discovery is limited; newly encountered chairs, tables, and small furniture pieces are often missed or absorbed into large regions, and existing identities may drift onto visually different objects instead of creating new object identities. 

53 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 12 Long-horizon qualitative results on a ScanNet sequence (3). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera first observes a sink, wall fixtures, counter regions, and nearby floor/wall surfaces, then turns around towards the door region with hanging backpack, and later revisits the bathroom fixtures from a different viewpoint. Savvy maintains a detailed and temporally consistent object decomposition across these large viewpoint changes: the sink basin, counter surface, wall-mounted fixtures, door, floor, wall regions, and small objects remain better separated and are re-associated when the camera returns. DEVA+SAM often segments broad foreground regions, but its local structure is unstable: sink and counter regions bleed into surrounding walls, thin fixtures are inconsistently preserved, and large wall/floor regions absorb nearby objects across frames. EntitySAM produces much coarser partitions with limited new-object discovery; large surfaces remain dominant, while small fixtures, sink details, and corridor objects are frequently missed, absorbed into background-like regions, or assigned inconsistent identities as the viewpoint changes. 

54 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 13 Long-horizon qualitative results on a cluttered ScanNet sequence (4). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera first observes cabinets, a stove, countertop objects, and floor regions, then moves toward a refrigerator and doorway area, and later returns to the kitchen workspace from different view-points. Savvy maintains a detailed object decomposition in this cluttered scene: cabinets, countertop surfaces, stove regions, bottles, small kitchen items, refrigerator surfaces, door regions, and floor/wall structures remain more separated across the long trajectory. DEVA+SAM captures many foreground regions but shows frequent local bleeding and blobbing: countertop objects merge into cabinets or counters, adjacent surfaces are inconsistently split, and small objects are often absorbed into larger re-gions as the camera moves. EntitySAM produces much coarser partitions and limited new-object discovery; large surfaces such as cabinets, walls, and appliances dominate, while small kitchen objects and newly observed structures are frequently missed or assigned to broad existing regions. 

55 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 14 Long-horizon qualitative results on an HM3D indoor home sequence (1). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera moves through a living-room and kitchen area with large viewpoint changes, repeated observations of furniture, walls, doors, ceiling structures, counters, cabinets, and small household objects. Savvy maintains a more detailed and temporally consistent scene decomposition across the trajectory: major room structures remain separated, while smaller objects and furniture regions are repeatedly recovered as the viewpoint changes. DEVA+SAM provides broad coverage but shows unstable local structure, with large surfaces and furniture regions frequently bleeding into one another or changing decomposition across frames. EntitySAM produces coarser partitions with limited object-set expansion; large surfaces are often stable, but newly observed furniture, cabinets, counters, and small objects are frequently missed as separate identities. This example shows that the trends observed on ScanNet also hold in HM3D: long-horizon OVS requires not only foreground coverage, but also persistent discovery, stable granularity, and re-association across repeated scene revisits. 

56 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 15 Long-horizon qualitative results on an HM3D bedroom sequence (2). The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera moves around a bedroom with repeated observations of walls, windows, doors, ceiling fan, bed, lamps, pillows, and small room objects under large viewpoint changes. Savvy maintains a relatively detailed and temporally consistent decomposition of both large room structures and smaller objects: wall and ceiling regions remain separated, while the bed, fan, door, and nearby objects are repeatedly recovered as the camera leaves and revisits the same regions. However, window consistency remains challenging for all methods; the same physical window can be rediscovered with a new identity or switch identity across revisits. DEVA+SAM provides broad coverage but shows severe local blobbing, bleeding, deformation, and unstructured fragmentation, especially around furniture, wall/ceiling boundaries, and window regions. EntitySAM produces coarser partitions with limited object-set expansion; large surfaces remain dominant, while smaller objects such as the ceiling fan, lamp, pillows, and door/window details are often missed as separate identities or absorbed into broad regions. This example further supports the HM3D trend: long-horizon OVS requires stable object-set maintenance across repeated views, not only coarse foreground coverage of large indoor surfaces. 

57 GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM GT Video Savvy DEV A+SAM EntitySAM Figure 16 Long-horizon qualitative results on an HM3D living-room sequence. The sequence is split into two vertical blocks from left to right, following the same video over time. The camera first observes a living-room area with couches, windows, wall decorations, tables, and shelves, then moves through a stairway/corridor view before returning to the living-room region from different viewpoints. Savvy maintains a relatively detailed and temporally consistent object decomposition across these large viewpoint changes: couches, pillows, tables, shelves, framed wall objects, windows, and room surfaces are repeatedly recovered and kept more separated over time. DEVA+SAM provides broad coverage but shows strong local instability, including blobbing, boundary bleeding, deformation of furniture regions, and inconsistent fragmentation of shelves, wall decorations, and couch/table areas. EntitySAM produces much coarser partitions with limited object-set expansion; large surfaces and dominant furniture regions remain visible, but many smaller objects such as frames, pillows, shelves, and table-top items are missed as separate identities or absorbed into broad regions. This example highlights a common HM3D challenge: long-horizon OVS must preserve detailed object structure while the camera alternates between wide room views, close-up wall/shelf views, and revisits to previously observed living-room regions. 

58 H Additional Qualitative Results 

This section provides additional qualitative results on ScanNet and HM3D, focusing on long-horizon scene-centric videos with strong ego-motion, clutter, object disappearance, and repeated re-observation. These examples com-plement the quantitative results in Sec. E.2 and Sec. E.3. 

# H.1 Long-Horizon ScanNet and HM3D Examples 

Figures 10–13 show qualitative comparisons on long ScanNet sequences, while Figures 14–16 show qualitative results on HM3D indoor home, bedroom, and living-room sequences. Each figure visualizes a single sequence over time, split into two vertical blocks from left to right. We compare the input video, GT, Savvy, DEVA+SAM, and EntitySAM. Across both datasets, Savvy maintains a more detailed and temporally consistent object decomposition. It preserves separate object identities for furniture, fixtures, surfaces, and small scene objects as the camera moves through the environment and later revisits previously observed regions. DEVA+SAM often provides broad foreground coverage, but its masks frequently show local blobbing, boundary bleeding, and inconsistent splitting of nearby structures. EntitySAM produces coarser partitions with limited new-object discovery; existing identities often drift onto newly observed regions or absorb distinct objects into large scene-level masks. These qualitative trends are consistent with the OGA diagnostics. High foreground coverage alone does not imply good open-world video segmentation. A method must also maintain a stable and expanding object set, avoid redundant or bleeding identities, and re-associate objects after disappearance and viewpoint change. 

Failure Cases 

Savvy reduces many common long-horizon OVS failures through deferred admission, appearance self-consistency, competition arbitration, and part-whole absorption. However, the setting remains challenging because the system must simultaneously decide what to segment, at what granularity , and whether a newly observed region should inherit an old identity . Figure 17 summarizes six representative failure modes. They fall into two broad groups: system-side failures, such as unstable granularity, missed re-association, local identity blobbing, and confusion among repeated similar objects; and evaluation/reference-side limitations, where dense clutter, motion blur, in-complete labels, or inconsistent annotation granularity make the notion of a single correct object decomposition ambiguous. In Fig. 17, each panel shows input frames, GT, and Savvy predictions, with dashed boxes marking the relevant regions. The examples are not meant to be exhaustive, but they highlight recurring challenges in long-horizon open-world segmentation. In Fig. 17(a), the camera moves through an elongated room and approaches a chair-like object near the far end. As the object becomes larger and clearer in view, Savvy changes its decomposition of the highlighted region, alternating between a larger local structure and a finer object-level mask. This illustrates granularity inconsistency under changing scale and viewpoint: the object becomes easier to segment, but the maintained representation is not always stable across the approach. Figure 17(b) shows a re-association failure after reappearance. The highlighted chair-like object is visible, disappears or undergoes a large viewpoint change, and later re-enters the scene. Savvy segments the object reasonably in the later frames, but it may not recover the original identity. This is the failure mode targeted by appearance self-consistency and track consolidation, but large viewpoint change and occlusion can still break long-gap identity linkage. Figure 17(c) shows spatial identity reuse/blobbing within a frame. This is different from long-range temporal ID reuse across unrelated object categories, which we observe rarely. Here, several visually similar brown objects enter the view together and are spatially close; Savvy can blob them into a shared predicted identity. The failure is therefore better understood as local spatial merging under appearance ambiguity, rather than as a frequent temporal reuse of one ID on different object types. Figure 17(d) shows identity confusion among repeated similar chairs. The highlighted regions contain multiple office chairs with similar appearance, shape, and material. Compared with the GT, Savvy exhibits both directions of identity inconsistency: in the upper frames, different GT chairs can receive the same predicted identity, while in the middle and lower frames, the same GT chair can be split into different predicted identities as the viewpoint changes. This 59 (a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

(f) (e) 

Video GT Savvy Video GT Savvy 

Video GT Savvy Video GT Savvy 

Video GT Savvy Video GT Savvy Figure 17 Representative failure cases and evaluation limitations of Savvy. Each panel shows input frames, GT, and Savvy predictions; dashed boxes mark the relevant regions. The examples cover: (a) granularity inconsistency under changing scale, where a chair-like object near the far end of an elongated room is represented at different granularities as the camera ap-proaches; (b) re-association failure after reappearance, where a previously observed object is segmented again but not linked back to its earlier identity; (c) spatial identity reuse / blobbing, where visually similar nearby brown objects entering the view are merged into a shared predicted identity; (d) identity confusion among repeated similar chairs, including both shared IDs across different GT chairs and split IDs for the same GT chair; (e) over-clutter with motion blur, difficult lighting/reflections, and annotation-granularity inconsistency, where dense bookstore-like shelves induce unstable coarse-to-fine predictions and the GT itself changes granularity across views; and (f) reference-side annotation limitations, where visually plausible object bound-aries are not consistently reflected in the GT. 

60 failure is not mainly about table structure; it reflects the difficulty of maintaining instance-level identities among repeated same-category objects under ego-motion, occlusion, and changing scale. Figure 17(e) shows a compound failure in a bookstore-like scene. The input frames contain dense shelves, many small visually separable items, and motion blur. Savvy alternates between coarse shelf-level regions and fine book/item-level predictions, producing granularity inconsistency. At the same time, the GT annotation itself changes granularity across frames: some views are annotated more like shelf/display regions, while others expose finer structures. This case is therefore both a system-side challenge and a reference-side annotation challenge. Addi-tional scene-level factors, including uneven lighting, reflections from glossy surfaces, mirror-like structures, and occasional overexposure, further make stable object discovery and consistent granularity selection difficult. Finally, Fig. 17(f) illustrates reference-side annotation limitations. The highlighted table/desk regions contain vi-sually meaningful boundaries and objects that are not always reflected consistently in the GT. Savvy may produce plausible object boundaries that disagree with incomplete or coarse annotations. OGA reduces some of this penalty through void handling and n:1 support, but the GT remains the evaluation anchor, so annotation incompleteness and artifacts cannot be fully removed. These examples suggest several directions for future work: stronger long-gap re-identification, more stable granu-larity selection, explicit reasoning over repeated similar objects, and adaptive suppression of overly fine discovery in highly cluttered regions. 

Limitations 

Savvy and OGA are intended as a step toward practical open-world long-horizon video segmentation, but sev-eral limitations remain. We summarize them along three axes: system limitations, evaluation limitations, and benchmark-scope limitations. 

System limitations. Savvy maintains an explicit object set over time, which enables persistent discovery and re-association, but also introduces several failure modes. First, object granularity is not always stable. The same physical region may be represented as a whole object in one view and as several parts in another, especially when the camera moves from a far view to a close view and the visual evidence becomes more detailed. HMD and part-whole absorption reduce this instability, but they do not fully solve the problem of choosing a single persistent granularity in open-world scenes. Second, long-gap re-association remains difficult. When an object disappears for many frames and later reappears under a different scale, viewpoint, lighting condition, or occlusion pattern, appearance self-consistency may reject the reappearance, or the system may create a new identity instead of linking it back to the old one. Conversely, in rare cases, a weak old identity can be revived on an incorrect nearby object. This is especially challenging for repeated same-category objects, such as many similar chairs in a conference room, where local appearance cues alone are often insufficient for reliable identity recovery. Third, Savvy can still produce local identity blobbing. Although we rarely observe long-range temporal reuse of the same identity across clearly different object types, spatially adjacent objects with similar appearance can be merged into one predicted identity within a frame. This occurs most often when multiple similar objects enter the view together, when object boundaries are weak, or when the propagated masks have already become uncertain. Fourth, very cluttered scenes remain challenging. In scenes such as bookshelves, stores, or dense tabletop regions, the image may contain hundreds of visually separable items. Savvy may discover these at a finer granularity than the reference annotation, leading to excessive object identities and unstable fine-scale fragments. Suppressing all such fine predictions would lose potentially valid open-world objects, while admitting all of them can produce an overly dense object set. This exposes a deeper unresolved problem: open-world segmentation needs mechanisms for adaptive granularity selection, not merely better mask propagation. 

Computational limitations. Savvy is more computationally involved than a single feed-forward video segmenta-tion model. The system repeatedly propagates an active object set, invokes an image-level segmenter for discovery, maintains transient buffers, updates appearance memories, and performs track consolidation. Memory pruning and active-track control make long videos feasible, but the pipeline remains sensitive to the number of active objects 61 and the frequency of discovery. Larger transient buffers and more frequent HMD invocation can improve some metrics, but they also increase runtime. This tradeoff is inherent to semi-online open-world object maintenance. 

Evaluation scope. OGA is designed to relax annotation granularity while preserving diagnostic control. It keeps the GT side as the reference anchor: each prediction can support at most one reference instance, while each refer-ence instance may receive support from multiple predictions. This asymmetric design is intentional. It allows valid part-to-whole support while avoiding uncontrolled many-to-many credit assignment, where a large ambiguous pre-diction could be credited to many reference objects. As a result, OGA is granularity-agnostic in the controlled n:1 

direction, but it does not treat arbitrary 1: n over-grouping as equally valid. This keeps the metric interpretable and prevents prediction-side identity bleeding from being hidden by relaxed matching. 

Benchmark-scope limitations. Our benchmark suite covers two central modes of open-world video segmenta-tion: standard video panoptic segmentation through VIPSeg, and long-horizon indoor scene-centric segmentation through ScanNet and HM3D. This combination allows us to study both dynamic cluttered videos and long-horizon ego-motion with repeated object re-observation. However, the suite does not exhaust all open-world settings. Out-door driving datasets, such as KITTI- or Waymo-style long videos, provide an important complementary regime with moving platforms, dynamic traffic participants, large-scale outdoor scenes, and different annotation conventions. Extending OGA and Savvy to these settings is an important direction for future work. 

Future directions. The limitations above suggest several concrete directions. First, stronger long-gap re-identification is needed, potentially using more view-invariant object descriptors, geometric memory, or explicit scene-level lo-calization reasoning. Second, open-world segmentation needs better granularity stabilization: the system should decide when to preserve part-level identities, when to absorb them into whole objects, and when to suppress overly fine discovery in dense clutter. Third, repeated similar objects require stronger relational reasoning beyond local appearance, such as spatial layout, object permanence, and scene-context constraints. Finally, evaluation itself should continue to evolve toward protocols that can handle incomplete annotations, multiple valid object decom-positions, and long-horizon identity structure without collapsing all errors into a single overlap score. 62 I Out-of-Domain Stress Test on Egocentric Activity Video 

Setup. Our primary long-horizon benchmarks, ScanNet and HM3D, emphasize static indoor scenes with camera motion, repeated re-observation, and changing viewpoint. To probe whether Savvy’s object-lifecycle mechanisms remain informative outside this regime, we run an out-of-domain stress test on egocentric activity video from EPIC-KITCHENS [6]. This setting adds hand-object manipulation, deforming hands, rapid head motion, motion blur, partial near-field crops, and frequent short-cycle revisits. Savvy is applied with frozen hyperparameters, using the same indoor configuration summarized in Table 4, with no per-domain retuning. Clips are sampled at 5 FPS from the original footage. Because these clips do not provide exhaustive long-horizon instance annotations for our setting, we treat the results as behavioral characterization rather than quantitative evidence of superiority. We focus on hands because they are among the most challenging instances in this domain: they deform continu-ously, are often motion-blurred, appear near the camera boundary, and can become spatially adjacent with nearly identical appearance when both hands interact. In Figs. 18 and 19, hand masks are highlighted in pink, and the per-panel L/R labels denote Savvy identities read off by manual inspection, not ground truth hand labels. 

Transfer under relatively clean appearance. Figure 18 shows a representative case from P08_25 . The right hand keeps identity 12 from t=16 to t=69 across large camera motion and a changing background when the hand remains comparatively rigid and in focus. This suggests that the same appearance self-consistency and track-consolidation mechanisms that support stable indoor objects can also sustain hand identity out of domain when their input evidence remains stable. The brief two-hand grouping at t=35 is retained in the visualization because it illustrates the same nearby-instance grouping mode discussed below. 

Observed failures align with known modes. Figure 19 shows a more difficult case from P04_19 . The right hand is tracked as identity 40 over a long interval, but later switches to identity 2 between t=117 and t=118 while the hand remains visible. In this clip, blur, deformation, and hand articulation appear to destabilize the appearance descriptor enough for the system to start a new identity. This aligns with the long-gap re-association and descriptor-instability modes already discussed in Fig. 17(b,e), although here the triggering conditions come from activity video rather than static-scene viewpoint change alone. The same clip also shows a two-hand grouping event at t=122 ,where the hands collapse into one identity. This is consistent with the local blobbing and similar-instance confusion in Fig. 17(c,d), now induced by adjacent hands with similar appearance. 

Annotation-free aggregate diagnostics. We also compute annotation-free diagnostics over 30 clips from 12 par-ticipants (Fig. 20). These diagnostics are not substitutes for ground-truth metrics, but they help characterize system behavior. The active-track count remains in a bounded range, while cumulative identities grow at a low, approx-imately steady rate. This pattern is consistent with the runtime behavior observed on ScanNet in Appendix A.7: memory pruning, active-track control, and consolidation keep the active set from compounding even as new iden-tities are introduced over time. The identity growth should not be interpreted as a single failure mode. Some of it is benign granularity variation: the same physical region may be represented as a part in one view and a larger whole in another. Some of it reflects true errors, such as re-association failures, stale identity leakage, or local grouping and splitting. Without dense long-horizon annotations, these effects cannot be separated cleanly, but the bounded active set indicates that the system contains the accumulation rather than letting it cascade. 

Takeaway. These out-of-domain examples suggest that Savvy’s lifecycle mechanisms can remain useful on ego-centric activity video, but they also expose the same system-side limitations discussed in Appendix H.1: granularity instability, re-association difficulty, identity leakage, and confusion among nearby similar instances. We do not treat this stress test as a new benchmark claim. Instead, it highlights a direction for future work: linking part-and whole-level masks across granularity levels so that different views of the same physical object are related rather than accumulated as unrelated identities. Such grouping would complement stronger re-identification and granularity stabilization in highly dynamic open-world videos. 63 Figure 18 Out-of-domain stress test on EPIC-KITCHENS: relatively clean appearance. In P08_25 , the right hand retains identity 12 

from t=16 to t=69 despite camera motion and background change, as long as the hand remains relatively rigid and in focus. The L/R labels are Savvy identities read off by manual inspection, not ground truth labels. The short grouping event at t=35 is shown rather than hidden, since it reflects the same nearby-instance confusion analyzed in Fig. 19. 

64 Figure 19 Out-of-domain stress test on EPIC-KITCHENS: representative failure case. In P04_19 , the right hand is tracked as identity 40 from t=29 to t=117 , then switches to identity 2 at t=118 while remaining visible. The clip also shows a two-hand grouping event at t=122 . These failures are consistent with the re-association, descriptor-instability, local blobbing, and similar-instance confusion modes catalogued in Fig. 17. 

Figure 20 Annotation-free endpoint diagnostics on EPIC-KITCHENS. Each dot is a clip; the diamond marks the mean; stars mark the two qualitative sequences. Across 30 clips from 12 participants, the active set remains bounded while identities accumulate at a low, roughly steady rate. This profile is consistent with a mixture of benign granularity variation and genuine re-association or grouping errors, with consolidation and active-track control preventing unbounded active-set growth. 

65