Title: Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16184v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 02:08:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

# Xinlei Yin ∗

University of Science and Technology of China 

# Xiulian Peng 

Microsoft Research Asia 

# Xiao Li 

Microsoft Research Asia 

# Zhiwei Xiong 

University of Science and Technology of China 

# Yan Lu 

Microsoft Research Asia Video frames of Shot 2 

Figure 1: Coherent storyboard-driven multi-shot long video generation. 

## Abstract 

Multi-shot long-form video generation remains challenging due to identity drift and compounding inconsistencies across shots. While storyboard-driven pipelines improve controllability, they are often executed in a feed-forward manner, with limited mechanisms to incorporate generated visual evidence back into subsequent con-ditioning. We propose CoTriSyGen , an agentic framework that for-mulates multi-shot long video generation as a closed-loop visual-text-memory synergy process, where planned intent, persistent memory, and generated visuals are jointly leveraged for iterative correction and long-range coherence. A vision-language-model-based analyzer reasons over this triplet and produces updates to both prompts and memory along two pathways: (i) intra-shot re-finement, which triggers targeted regeneration when semantic or compositional violations are detected and refines image-to-video prompt for coherent motions; and (ii) inter-shot refinement, which rewrites subsequent-shot prompts to propagate newly manifested 

> ∗This work was done at Microsoft Research Asia.

entities or attributes and improve prompt quality (e.g., composi-tional grounding and cinematic fluency) based on generated evi-dence. The loop is grounded in an entity-centric memory modeled as a mutable visual state that evolves as the story progresses, which is continuously updated by both the generator and the analyzer by adding new and evolved entities to reflect appearance changes, accumulated multi-view evidence, and multi-entity compositions. Experiments on our curated StoryBench benchmark demonstrate substantial improvements in cross-shot consistency, prompt adher-ence, and cinematic continuity over representative methods. 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in generative modeling have significantly ex-panded the capabilities of video generation in content creation, simulation, and interactive storytelling [ 6, 16 , 17 , 23 , 27 , 36 ]. How-ever, generating long videos that remain coherent over extended temporal horizons remains a major challenge. As video duration in-creases, models must maintain consistency in appearance, motion, spatial layout, and narrative progression while operating under practical computational constraints. 

> arXiv:2606.16184v1 [cs.CV] 15 Jun 2026 X. Yin et al.

A common strategy for long generation is to adopt storyboard-driven pipelines that decompose a story into shot specifications and then execute shot-by-shot synthesis [ 10 , 19 , 20 , 32 , 38 , 41 ]. This decomposition improves controllability, yet many existing pipelines are executed in a largely feed-forward manner: once a plan is pro-duced, shots are generated sequentially with limited mechanisms to incorporate generated visual evidence back into subsequent con-ditioning. In practice, even small deviations in early shots (e.g., subtle identity drift, missing accessories, or altered backgrounds) can persist uncorrected and subsequently compound, leading to increasingly inconsistent characters, props, and compositions as the story unfolds. The problem is further exacerbated by the fact that long stories naturally involve state changes (e.g., a character puts on a hat, or appears from new viewpoints), where maintaining consistency requires not only recalling past information but also updating what should be considered canonical at each time step. In this work, we argue that long-form video generation should be treated as a stateful closed-loop process rather than a one-pass execu-tion of a storyboard. We present CoTriSyGen , an agentic framework that formulates long video generation as a closed-loop visual-text-memory synergy process. The core principle is to enforce a 

recurrent agreement among three complementary information sources that are individually insufficient for long-range continuity: 

planned intent (underspecified text), persistent memory (reusable entity anchors), and generated visuals (realized, richer, yet poten-tially deviant content). Concretely, CoTriSyGen deploys an Analyzer 

agent that continuously reconciles textual intent with visual con-tent, translating realized visuals into memory updates and refined conditioning to ground subsequent generation. A distinctive aspect of our framework is that synergy operates at two complementary levels. First, intra-shot synergy functions as a local alignment mechanism: the Analyzer evaluates candidate keyframes against memory to mitigate textual ambiguity, trigger-ing targeted regeneration if needed. Crucially, once a keyframe is accepted, the Analyzer dynamically adapts the intended motion prompt to the realized spatial layout, ensuring physical coherence within the clip. Second, inter-shot synergy acts as a global state-tracking mechanism: the Analyzer distills newly generated video clips into explicit memory updates and rewrites subsequent-shot prompts. This ensures the evolving narrative seamlessly inherits established identities, viewpoints, and temporally evolved object states. This synergistic loop is grounded in an entity-centric dynamic memory. Rather than acting as a static frame cache, this mem-ory acts as a repository of discrete, reusable entities . Mediated by the Analyzer , the memory is explicitly queried before keyframe generation, and dynamically updated post-video to archive newly emerged visual evidence. Concretely, the memory can add newly emerged entities and revise existing ones to reflect appearance evo-lution (e.g., clothing/accessory changes), accumulated multi-view evidence, and evolving multi-entity compositions. This notion of an evolving state is crucial for realistic storytelling, where consistency is not merely repetition but coherent continuity under change. To support systematic evaluation of long-form generation, we curate StoryBench , a benchmark focusing on multi-shot story videos and long-range consistency. Experiments on StoryBench demon-strate that CoTriSyGen improves cross-shot consistency, prompt adherence and cinematic continuity over representative storyboard-to-video methods, validating the effectiveness of closing the loop through visual-text-memory synergy. Our contributions are threefold: (1) We develop an agentic long-form video generation framework that exposes planning, memory, and analysis as explicit components, enabling persistent state and iterative refinement across shots. (2) We introduce an entity-centric dynamic memory that acts as a mutable visual state, maintaining characters, props, and scenes across both image and video gener-ation. (3) We propose a visual-text-memory synergy method that closes the generation loop by interpreting generated visuals, updat-ing memory, refining prompts, and selectively triggering regenera-tion to enforce long-range consistency and narrative flow. 

## 2 Related works 2.1 Keyframe-based Multi-Shot Generation 

A widely explored paradigm for multi-shot long video generation is to decompose a story into a sequence of shots anchored by keyframes or explicit visual references [ 5, 8, 12 , 18 , 26 , 30 , 34 , 40 ], which serve to stabilize identity and composition across shots. This paradigm often builds upon foundational video diffusion archi-tectures [ 9 , 25 ], leveraging their strong prior of motion and ge-ometry. StoryDiffusion [ 40 ] improves long-range consistency by introducing consistent self-attention for generating coherent im-age sequences and extends to video via semantic-space motion prediction between keyframes. IC - LoRA [ 12 ] enables consistent generation of image sets by adapting diffusion transformers through in -context reference conditioning, and is commonly used to con-struct coherent storyboard panels or keyframes that later guide video generation. VideoStudio [ 20 ] leverages an LLM to generate multi-scene scripts and produces entity reference images that con-dition subsequent per-scene video synthesis. Hierarchical pipelines such as MovieDreamer [ 38 ] and VideoGen -of - Thought (VGoT) [ 39 ]further combine script planning, keyframe generation, and shot-level video synthesis to scale narrative length, often incorporating explicit identity propagation or transition smoothing mechanisms. While effective in anchoring appearance, these approaches primar-ily enforce consistency through static or pre-generated references, and typically lack mechanisms to revise constraints based on errors observed in generated outputs during execution. 

## 2.2 Agentic Multi-Shot Video Generation 

Another line of work frames long video generation as a production process decomposed into planning and execution stages, often or-chestrated by LLMs or multi-agent systems [ 10 , 11 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 41 ]. VideoDirectorGPT [ 19 ] uses an LLM planner to expand a user prompt into a structured video plan, including scenes, entities, layouts, and consistency groupings, followed by grounded video generation with explicit layout control. Similarly, Vlogger [ 41 ], Sto-ryAgent [ 10 ], and MovieAgent [ 32 ] employ agent-based designs that assign specialized roles (e.g., scriptwriter, director, storyboard designer) to coordinate story planning and video synthesis, improv-ing narrative structure and character consistency across scenes. These systems improve controllability at the planning stage, but are often executed in a feed-forward manner, where generated visuals are treated as final outputs rather than signals for future correction Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed framework. 

and visually grounded prompt refinement. As a result, deviations or inconsistencies introduced during generation may propagate uncorrected across shots. 

## 2.3 Model-based Multi-Shot Video Generation 

A complementary direction addresses long-form consistency by modifying or scaling the video generative model itself to natively handle extended temporal contexts [ 1, 3 , 4, 7, 13 , 15 , 21 , 28 , 37 ]. Long Context Tuning (LCT) [ 7] expands pre-trained single-shot video dif-fusion models to scene-level contexts by extending attention across multiple shots, enabling coherent multi-shot generation within a single model. HoloCine [ 21 ] further proposes holistic multi-shot narrative generation with sparse inter-shot attention and per-shot prompt localization, enabling end-to-end cinematic scene synthesis. To improve scalability, sparse-attention methods such as Mixture of Contexts (MoC) [ 2] and MoGA [ 14 ] introduce learnable routing mechanisms that dynamically retrieve salient history tokens, al-lowing minute-level video generation with near-linear complexity. EchoShot [ 29 ] similarly embeds shot-awareness directly into the video diffusion transformer, enabling native multi-shot modeling for identity-consistent portrait video generation. These model-based approaches prioritize architectural capacity for long-horizon de-pendency modeling, but typically encode memory implicitly within network activations, rather than exposing memory as an explicit, revisable state. Across these paradigms, memory and conditioning signals are typically treated as either static references, implicit architectural state, or feed-forward planning artifacts. In contrast, CoTriSyGen explicitly exposes memory as a mutable visual state and integrates prompt refinement as a first-class control mechanism through closed-loop visual-text-memory reasoning. 

## 3 Methodology 3.1 Overview 

Multi-shot video generation aims to synthesize a sequence of video clips {𝑉 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1 that narrate a coherent storyline while maintaining strict visual continuity, including character identity, object states, and scene layouts across varying camera views and temporal tran-sitions. Given a story prompt, a shot planner first generates condi-tioning prompts {( 𝑞 0 

> 𝑡

, 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

)} 𝑇 𝑡 =1, where 𝑞 0 

> 𝑡

and 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

denote the planned keyframe prompt and corresponding video motion prompt for shot 

𝑡 , respectively. The generator’s task is to produce {𝑉 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1 such that they adhere to initial shot prompts while ensuring long-range cross-shot consistency. The fundamental challenge stems from a lack of synergy be-tween the initially planned text and the dynamically generated visual content. In traditional one-pass pipelines, this disconnect introduces two critical issues. First, newly instantiated entities or evolving states in the visual domain are not explicitly tracked and inherited, depriving subsequent shots of precise visual references. Second, initial visual deviations, often induced by textual ambi-guity, inevitably accumulate over time, causing later generations to progressively drift from the intended narrative. Together, these compounding errors severely break the long-range consistency required for multi-shot storytelling. To address the limitations, we propose CoTriSyGen, an agentic framework that reformulates multi-shot generation as a closed-loop visual-text-memory synergy. Unlike passive frame caches, our framework employs a dynamic memory bank 𝑀 as an active repos-itory of reusable visual entities. An Analyzer agent coordinates the synergy by interpreting generated visuals against intended prompts, grounding them in 𝑀 , and feeds the resulting updates back to condition subsequent generation. At each shot 𝑡 , the pipeline tightly integrates the textual plan with visual realization through three interconnected stages (see Fig. 2): 

𝑀, 𝑅 𝑡 = Retrieve&Update (𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 ) (1) 

𝐼 𝑡 , 𝑉 𝑡 = ShotGen (𝑞 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 , 𝑅 𝑡 ), (2) 

𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 , 𝑞 𝑡 +1 = Analyzer (𝐼 𝑡 , 𝑉 𝑡 , 𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 , 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

, 𝑞 0 

> 𝑡 +1

), (3) where 𝑅 𝑡 denotes the retrieved references, 𝐼 𝑡 denotes the generated keyframe, and 𝑉 𝑡 denotes the video clip at shot 𝑡 . 𝑞 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 , and 𝑞 𝑡 +1X. Yin et al. 

are the refined keyframe prompt, video prompt, and next-shot keyframe prompt, respectively. 

Memory Retrieve and Update : For each round of keyframe generation, the Memory Controller queries the memory 𝑀 to re-trieve necessary visual references 𝑅 𝑡 based on the current keyframe prompt 𝑞 𝑡 (refined either by previous-shot synergy or current-shot iterative synergy). Newly introduced entities are explicitly regis-tered into 𝑀 .

Shot Generation : Each shot generated by the Generator module is decomposed into keyframe and image-to-video generation, with visual-text-memory synergy in between them after each generation. The keyframe 𝐼 𝑡 is generated based on 𝑞 𝑡 and 𝑅 𝑡 while the video 𝑉 𝑡 

is based on 𝑚 𝑡 and 𝐼 𝑡 .

Visual-Text-Memory Synergy : The Analyzer module han-dles this triplet synergy after each visual generation. After each keyframe generation, an intra-shot Image-Text-Memory syn-ergy is applied to iteratively refine 𝑞 𝑡 to reduce randomness in-duced by text ambiguity until the newly generated 𝐼 𝑡 is accepted. Then a motion prompt refinement based on this realized spatial configuration in 𝐼 𝑡 is conducted to produce 𝑚 𝑡 from 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

, ensuring physical and temporal consistency during the subsequent video generation. After each video 𝑉 𝑡 generation, an inter-shot Video-Text-Memory synergy evaluates the visual evidence to extract newly appeared or temporally evolved states, writes them back to update 𝑀 , and refines the initial conditioning for the next shot into 𝑞 𝑡 +1, allowing subsequent generations to seamlessly inherit realized identities and viewpoints. Built upon the principles of dynamic memory (Section 3.2) and 

visual-text-memory synergy (Section 3.3), our method transforms multi-shot generation from an open-loop prompting pipeline into an autoregressive framework that progressively grounds future narrative steps in accumulated visual content. 

## 3.2 Entity-Centric Dynamic Memory 

We represent the persistent context as a mutable, entity-centric memory bank 𝑀 𝑡 . Rather than storing undifferentiated frame caches, 

𝑀 𝑡 maintains discrete, reusable visual entity states, i.e. 

𝑀 𝑡 = {𝑒 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑡 

> 𝑖 =1

, 𝑒 𝑖 = (𝑛 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑖 , 𝑏 𝑖 ), (4) where 𝑛 𝑖 is the entity name, 𝑑 𝑖 is its textual description, 𝑃 𝑖 is a set of reference images, and 𝑏 𝑖 optionally links the entry to a base entity when it corresponds to an evolved state or a continuity-critical view (e.g., when a character changes clothes or is observed from a new angle, they may be linked to the first-appeared entity). This design is motivated by the observation that cross-shot con-sistency depends less on preserving arbitrary past frames than on preserving the relevant reusable states , including canonical identi-ties, continuity-critical viewpoints, and temporally evolved object appearances. A static frame cache does not distinguish among these cases, whereas an entity-centric memory can be queried and updated at the state level. For instance, in Figure 2, when the protag-onist ’Emily’ putting on a wig, the Analyzer captures this semantic shift from the generated video. It then instantiates a derived en-tity profile (e.g., ’Emily wearing a wig’) that is topologically linked to her base identity ’Emily’. This explicit formulation allows the generative module to selectively retrieve the precise evolutionary state required for the current narrative context, thereby preserving 

Algorithm 1 Visual-Text-Memory Refinement Loop 

Input: 

Shot descriptions {( 𝑞 0 

> 𝑡

, 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

)} 𝑇 𝑡 =1; Max rounds 𝐾 𝑀 ← ∅ ⊲ Initialize global memory 

𝑞 1 ← 𝑞 01 ⊲ Initialize current image prompt 

for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do 

𝑀, 𝑅 𝑡 ← Retrieve&Update (𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 )

𝐶 𝑡 ← ∅ ⊲ Candidate keyframe set 

𝐼 𝑡 ← ∅ ⊲ The selected keyframe 

for 𝑘 = 1 to 𝐾 do 

𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

← 𝐺𝑒𝑛 img (𝑞 𝑡 , 𝑅 𝑡 ) ⊲ Generate keyframe 

𝐶 𝑡 ← 𝐶 𝑡 ∪ { 𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

}

// Intra-shot Image-Text-Memory synergy 

(𝑑 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

, 𝑞 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

) ← Analyzer img1 (𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

, 𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 )

if 𝑑 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

= accept then 

𝐼 𝑡 ← 𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

; break end if 

𝑞 𝑡 ← 𝑞 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

⊲ Image prompt refinement 

𝑀, 𝑅 𝑡 ← Retrieve&Update (𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 )

end for if 𝐼 𝑡 = ∅ then 

𝐼 𝑡 ← SelectBest (𝐶 𝑡 )

end if 

// Intra-shot Image-Text-Memory synergy 

𝑚 𝑡 ← Analyzer img2 (𝐼 𝑡 , 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

) ⊲ Video prompt refinement 

𝑉 𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑛 vid (𝐼 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 ) ⊲ Generate the video clip 

if 𝑡 < 𝑇 then 

// Inter-shot Video-Text-Memory synergy 

(𝑈 𝑡 , 𝑞 𝑡 +1) ← Analyzer Vid (𝑉 𝑡 , 𝑀, 𝑚 𝑡 , 𝑞 0

> 𝑡 +1

)

𝑀 ← 𝑀 ∪ 𝑈 𝑡 ⊲ Global memory update 

end if end for return {𝑉 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1

fine-grained identity coherence even under complex, multi-step appearance transitions. 

3.2.1 Keyframe memory retrieval and update. When generating the keyframe of shot 𝑡 , we inspect 𝑞 𝑡 to identify the entities and states required by this frame. If the required state already exists in memory, we reuse it; otherwise we instantiate a new entry and register it into 𝑀 𝑡 before keyframe generation, as denoted in Equation 1. This retrieval favors entries whose identity, state, and view-point best match the current description. Specifically, the Memory Controller , implemented as a VLM-based agent, takes the current memory 𝑀 𝑡 and the shot description 𝑞 𝑡 as input, and outputs the set of existing entities to be reused as well as the set of entities to be newly instantiated. For each new entity, the Memory Controller in-vokes the generator’s text-to-image module to synthesize its visual representation and registers it into 𝑀 𝑡 before shot generation. 

3.2.2 Post-video update. After generating the video clip 𝑉 𝑡 in shot 𝑡 ,we update the global memory 𝑀 𝑡 in parallel with the next keyframe prompt 𝑞 0  

> 𝑡 +1

refinement through the Analyzer during the Video-Text-Memory synergy process. The updated entities 𝑈 𝑡 are injected Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

into the global memory, i.e. 𝑀 𝑡 = 𝑀 𝑡 ∪ 𝑈 𝑡 . Unlike the keyframe update that reduces ambiguity regarding what should appear in the keyframe, the post-video update prevents memory from becom-ing outdated when objects or characters visibly evolve within the generated video clip. 

## 3.3 Visual-Text-Memory Synergy 

Our visual-text-memory synergy enforces consistency by contin-uously reconciling the distinct contributions of each information source. The underlying motivation is that there is large information gap among the three sources and none of them is sufficient on its own for long-range continuity. Text specifies the narrative in-tent but is inherently under-specified regarding fine-grained spatial layouts, viewpoints, or detailed objects and appearance. Memory supplies reusable entity anchors, but retrieval alone cannot guaran-tee that the selected reference is fully compatible with the current narrative intent. Generated visuals provide realized content; yet, they contain much richer information and may deviate from the intended prompt or introduce new states that are absent from the original description. By entangling these three sources, our method ensures that generation is driven by a recurrent agreement among the intended plan, historical context, and realized visual facts. Under this view, the synergy operates at two distinct levels. 

Inter-shot synergy functions as a global state-tracking mecha-nism, translating realized video evidence into memory updates and refined next-shot prompts through the Analyzer , thereby allowing the evolving narrative to seamlessly inherit established identities, viewpoints, and object states. Intra-shot synergy acts as a local alignment mechanism, utilizing the Analyzer to stabilize the initial visual anchor (the keyframe) and ensuring that the subsequent video motion is physically compatible with this realized layout. Algorithm 1 summarizes the whole visual-text-memory refinement loop with detailed prompts provided in the Appendix. 

3.3.1 Inter-shot synergy. Across shots, the video Analyzer Analyzer vid ,a VLM-based agent, functions as a global state-tracking mechanism that distills the generated video clip 𝑉 𝑡 into explicit memory updates 

𝑈 𝑡 and refined next-shot conditioning 𝑞 𝑡 +1 by 

(𝑈 𝑡 , 𝑞 𝑡 +1) ← Analyzer Vid (𝑉 𝑡 , 𝑀, 𝑚 𝑡 , 𝑞 0

> 𝑡 +1

). (5) Consequently, the generation at step 𝑡 + 1 is grounded not merely in the static planned prompts (𝑞 0

> 𝑡 +1

, 𝑚 0

> 𝑡 +1

), but in the actualized visual history accumulated up to time 𝑡 .This autoregressive state propagation is critical for resolving continuity errors that stem from dynamic state evolution within a shot. For example, a character whose face is obscured or turned away in the initial keyframe might reveal their frontal face during the generated motion of video 𝑉 𝑡 , or they might change their attire as the action unfolds. If these newly materialized visual facts are not promptly archived into memory and used to contextualize the subsequent prompt 𝑞 𝑡 +1, the model will fail to preserve identity when the next shot demands that same frontal face or implicitly requires the evolved appearance. By continuously writing realized video evidence back into both the memory bank and future text prompts, subsequent generations are able to adhere to the most up-to-date visual reality rather than outdated textual plans. 

3.3.2 Intra-shot synergy. Within shot 𝑡 , our method employs an intra-shot loop as a local alignment mechanism to stabilize the initial visual anchor and ensure physical consistency throughout the clip. First, an image analyzer Analyzer img1 iteratively evaluates the candidate keyframe against the text conditions and the global memory state given by 

(𝑑 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

, 𝑞 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

) ← Analyzer img1 (𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

, 𝑀, 𝑞 𝑡 ), 𝑘 = 1 → 𝐾, (6) where 𝐾 is the maximum iteration number. 𝑑 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

is the analyzer decision output. 𝑞 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

is the current refine prompt. If the current keyframe 𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

deviates from established visual facts, the Analyzer 

rejects it, i.e. 𝑑 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

= 𝑟𝑒 𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 , and a targeted regeneration based on the refined prompt 𝑞 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

is triggered. For instance, if the text description lacks explicit pose information, the system might retrieve a frontal-view entity reference but arbitrarily generate a back-view keyframe. If this newly synthesized back view contradicts an existing back-view entity of the same character already stored in memory, identity consistency is violated. To resolve this, the Analyzer rejects the frame, refines the text prompt to explicitly specify the intended pose (e.g., "back to the camera"), retrieves the correct back-view entity from memory, and regenerates the keyframe. Once the keyframe 𝐼 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑡

is accepted, it establishes the definitive spatial layout for the shot. Because text prompts often leave spatial geometry underspecified, the planned motion 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

may clash with the realized visual anchor. To prevent this, we condition the video prompt refinement on the keyframe with the Analyzer img2 by 

𝑚 𝑡 ← Analyzer img2 (𝐼 𝑡 , 𝑚 0 

> 𝑡

), (7) where 𝑚 𝑡 is the refined video prompt. This step ensures that the gen-erated motion remains physically plausible within the instantiated environment. For example, in Figure 2, if the narrative requires a protagonist to "pick up a wig from a table," but the accepted keyframe happens to place the table behind the character, execut-ing the original prompt would yield spatially disjointed motion. Instead, the refined prompt 𝑚 𝑡 dynamically adapts to the realized layout, instructing the character to "turn around, walk to the table, and pick up a wig." Finally, the video clip is generated using the aligned conditions, 

𝐼 𝑡 and 𝑚 𝑡 . By rigorously grounding both keyframe evaluation and motion refinement in the realized visual evidence, this intra-shot synergy effectively eliminates local spatial contradictions and main-tains shot-level coherence. 

## 4 Evaluation Benchmark 4.1 Dataset Curation 

Existing video generation benchmarks predominantly focus on short clips or single-scene narratives, failing to evaluate long-term semantic and visual coherence.. To address this, we introduce Story-Bench , a multi-scene, multi-entity dataset specifically designed for long-form storytelling. StoryBench consists of 30 comprehensive stories, each structured as an 8-shot sequence. To ensure stylistic diversity and broad applicability, the dataset is composed of 20 real-world human scenarios and 10 anime-style stories. The gen-eration pipeline leverages the advanced reasoning of LLMs: we first utilize GPT-5 [ 22 ] to synthesize structured story synopses, and X. Yin et al. 

Table 1: Comparison results on multi-shot long video generation. 

Methods Cross-shot consistency VLM-as-judge-shot VLM-as-judge-global Average SameGrp CrossGrp Overall adherence Completeness Consistency Narrative flow Overall Wan2.2 0.5883 0.6191 0.5652 3.81 3.20 1.70 2.70 2.70 StoryDiff+Wan2.2 0.6472 0.6670 0.6325 3.10 3.60 2.40 3.00 3.20 HoloCine 0.6650 0.6822 0.6521 2.55 2.80 3.10 3.30 2.90 Ours 0.7083 0.7466 0.6795 3.93 4.20 4.70 4.30 4.20 Table 2: Ablation results on full StoryBench. 

Methods Cross-shot consistency VLM-as-judge-shot VLM-as-judge-global Average SameGrp CrossGrp Overall adherence Completeness Consistency Narrative flow Overall Ours w/o memory 0.5092 0.5351 0.4879 3.92 3.73 2.10 3.20 3.07 Ours w/o synergy 0.5913 0.6223 0.5652 3.98 4.37 4.17 4.23 4.20 Ours w/o refine 0.5899 0.6316 0.5550 3.95 4.37 4.07 4.33 4.27 Ours 0.6172 0.6613 0.5804 3.98 4.40 4.43 4.37 4.30 

subsequently employ it as a shot planner to derive fine-grained visual prompts for each shot. These prompts are decomposed into 

t2i_prompt (for keyframe synthesis) and i2v_prompt (for narra-tive and motion dynamics), covering character appearance, actions, environmental settings, event logic, and camera perspectives. To rigorously evaluate identity and temporal consistency, we in-corporate specific challenge designs into StoryBench. Each story involves at least two primary protagonists, with one character un-dergoing an outfit change followed by an optional recovery to the original appearance (e.g., hat, scarf, clothing). We strategically fix the shot indices where these transitions occur to facilitate standard-ized, group-wise consistency evaluation. Furthermore, in 10 of the real-world cases, we introduce an additional challenge in which the secondary protagonist does not appear in the initial frame but instead enters from the middle of the second shot onward. This "delayed character entry" setting provides a stringent test for the model’s ability to maintain consistency for entities absent from the starting context, a common yet challenging scenario in cinematic production. Together, these designs yield stories with evolving character states, offering a comprehensive evaluation of long-range identity and temporal coherence. 

## 4.2 Evaluation Metric 

4.2.1 Cross-Shot Consistency. To assess cross-shot consistency, we leverage ViCLIP-based similarity metric [ 31 ] following [ 21 ]. All shots are divided into two groups based on the outfit of the primary protagonist. We then compute similarity scores for shot pairs within the same group as well as across different groups. While the global-level VLM-as-Judge already evaluates character consistency, this metric serves as a complementary, fine-grained assessment. 

4.2.2 VLM-as-Judge Evaluation. Automatic metrics like CLIP score capture low-level visual-text alignment but cannot assess whether a multi-shot video coherently enacts its intended narrative. To address this, we introduce a two-level VLM-as-Judge evaluation powered by OpenAI o3 [ 24 ] with multimodal vision. At the shot level, evenly-spaced frames are sampled at 2 fps from each individ-ual clip and presented to the judge alongside its shot description. The judge rates three fine-grained dimensions, i.e. content match 

(subjects, objects, and setting), action match (motion and activity), and camera match (framing and shot type), plus an overall adherence 

score, each on a 1-5 integer scale. At the global level, uniformly sampled frames at 1 fps across the fully assembled story video are evaluated against the original story-level prompt. The judge scores four dimensions: plot completeness , character consistency , narrative flow , and overall adherence to the story (1–5 each), and provides free-form identification of the strongest and weakest aspects of the video. 

## 5 Experiments 5.1 Implementation Details 

We leverage GPT-Image-1.5 1 as the text-to-image and image-to-image generation model to generate the keyframe for each shot, and the state-of-the-art open-source model Wan2.2-I2V-A14B [ 27 ]for video generation. We apply OpenAI o3 as the core VLM for the 

Analyzer and Memory Controller and GPT-5 for the shot Planner .The resolution of all images and video clips is 832x480. Each shot is 5 seconds. To preclude self-preference bias, the o3-based VLM-as-Judge strictly evaluates the final video pixels against the initial story constraints, entirely bypassing its own intermediate prompts for fair comparison with baselines. 

## 5.2 Quantitative Comparison 

We compare our method with several baselines: (1) text-to-video model Wan2.2-T2V-14B, applied to each shot independently to show         

> 1https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-image-1.5 Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video Wan 2.2
> StoryDiffusion
> + Wan 2.2 HoloCine Ours
> “The woman pulls out a large shawl with flower prints from her bag.”
> “Tram interior, they sit with
> camera …”
> “She reaches into tote as
> he stands beside her ...”
> “She is wearing a shawl with
> notebook as he offers a bottle…”
> “Seaside, She is wearing a
> shawl walk with him …”
> “Seaside, she and he walk ,
> with a camera…”

Figure 3: Qualitative comparison with other methods. 

the single-shot consistency reference. (2) a two-stage keyframe-based method, StoryDiffusion [ 40 ] for keyframe generation and Wan2.2-I2V-14B model for I2V generation. (3) the multi-shot video generation model HoloCine [ 21 ], which finetunes Wan2.2-T2V-14B to support minute-scale long video generation. As both StoryDiffu-sion and HoloCine have some constraints on the stories (e.g. styles, keyframe characters), this comparison is performed on a subset of StoryBench, including 10 real-human stories with persistent two main characters in each shot for fair comparison. Table 1 reports the quantitative results of all methods. Notably, our method achieves a SameGrp consistency of 0.7466, surpass-ing the state-of-the-art HoloCine by 9.4%, which demonstrates its effectiveness in maintaining visual stability and fine-grained de-tails within a specific group after a costume change. Furthermore, the high CrossGrp consistency score (0.6795) demonstrates that our model effectively preserves the character’s core identity even amidst drastic changes in attire, ensuring robust cross-shot continu-ity throughout the transition between different narrative segments. In terms of high-level semantic evaluation, our method attains the highest scores in all VLM-as-judge metrics, particularly in narra-tive flow (4.30) and global consistency (4.70). These results indicate that by maintaining a stable character identity and appearance, our model facilitates a more coherent and fluid storytelling experience compared to existing baselines. The significant lead in overall ad-herence and story completeness further validates the efficacy of our approach in translating complex, multi-shot prompts into visually and narratively unified long videos. 

## 5.3 Qualitative Comparison 

We provide a qualitative comparison in Figure 3 to illustrate the su-periority of our method. As demonstrated in the visual results, our proposed method significantly outperforms other approaches in terms of comprehensive cross-shot consistency. Baseline methods struggle to maintain character/prop/background continuity, fre-quently exhibiting identity shifts and structural distortions across shots. In contrast, our approach effectively preserves the consis-tent appearance of main characters, props, and backgrounds across diverse camera angles and actions. Furthermore, our method demonstrates an exceptional capabil-ity to maintain the visual integrity of dynamic props. For instance, when a new item, the floral shawl, is introduced in Shot 2 , our model accurately preserves its complex texture, pattern, and geometric shape in all subsequent shots without any deviation or semantic drift. Finally, our approach exhibits robust scene-level consistency. Given that the final two shots take place in the same seaside en-vironment, our method models the background as a persistent, X. Yin et al. Shot k  Shot k+1   

> w/o synergy w/o prompt refinement proposed

Figure 4: Qualitative ablation study of memory synergy and prompt refinement. Case 1: Temporal Evolution. The proposed method correctly reflects the candle’s physical consumption over time. Case 2: View Consistency. Refinement ensures the retrieval of the correct dorsal pose to maintain identity across shots. Case 3: State Awareness. Our approach retrieves the "finished" state of the painting rather than intermediate or random states. 

maintainable entity. This allows it to effectively preserve the global background and spatial layout across different temporal segments, ultimately producing a highly coherent multi-shot narrative. 

## 5.4 Ablation Studies 

As shown in Table 2, we evaluate the effectiveness of our com-ponents by comparing the full method against three variants on the full StoryBench: Ours w/o memory (independent shot genera-tion via Wan2.2-T2V-14B), Ours w/o synergy (still has pre-keyframe updates), and Ours w/o refine (using raw planner text without ana-lyzer refinement for both image and video prompts). Our proposed method achieves the best performance across all metrics. Notably, the performance of Ours w/o refine is nearly as low as Ours w/o synergy , demonstrating that text refinement is critical for precise entity retrieval. Without it, the inherent ambiguity in the initial planning text undermines the effectiveness of the memory synergy mechanism, confirming that both dynamic updates and refinement are essential for maintaining narrative consistency. 

Figure 4 provides a qualitative ablation study on memory syn-ergy and prompt refinement. Temporal Evolution (Case 1): With-out synergy, the model cannot track newly introduced entities (the candle). While memory alone retrieves the object, failing to re-fine the prompt ignores the temporal lapse from "evening" to "late night", yielding a pristine candle. Our full method correctly de-duces physical consumption over time. View Consistency (Case 2): Given an ambiguous prompt ("knight gazing at a gate"), the raw text fails to bridge the implicit "knight" with the memory’s "dorsal aspect," hallucinating a disjointed side-view. Refinement explicitly targets the correct stored pose, ensuring spatial coher-ence. State Awareness (Case 3): Lacking both modules causes the model to hallucinate a completely different painting. Relying solely on raw text retrieves an outdated, incomplete artwork state from memory. Our framework successfully identifies the semantically evolved state (the "finished" painting), aligning the generation with narrative progress. (See Appendix for more details of the cases). 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced CoTriSyGen , an agentic framework that reformulates long-form video generation as a closed-loop visual-text-memory synergy process to overcome the challenges of iden-tity drift and compounding inconsistencies. By leveraging a VLM-based Analyzer to perform iterative intra-shot and inter-shot re-finements grounded in a mutable, entity-centric dynamic memory, our method ensures that the generated visual content is continu-ously reconciled with narrative intent. Experiments on our curated 

StoryBench benchmark demonstrate that CoTriSyGen significantly improves long-range coherence and cinematic continuity over ex-isting feed-forward pipelines. 

## 7 Ethics Statement 

Our work is purely a research project focusing on agentic frame-work to tackle identity drift and compounding inconsistencies in long-form multi-shot video generation. Currently, we have no plans to integrate this technology into any product or to make it publicly accessible. In future development, we will adhere strictly to Mi-crosoft’s AI principles. Although we demonstrate results involving human faces in our research paper, the sole purpose is to showcase the capability of long-term identity coherence. We do not intend to generate content for misleading, deceptive, or harmful purposes. We strongly oppose any misuse of this technology to create mislead-ing or harmful content involving real individuals. Additionally, we Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

are interested in applying the key idea of this research to advance forgery detection techniques. 

## References 

[1] Zhaochong An, Menglin Jia, Haonan Qiu, Zijian Zhou, Xiaoke Huang, Zhiheng Liu, Weiming Ren, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Ding Liu, Sen He, et al . 2025. Onestory: Coherent multi-shot video generation with adaptive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.07802 (2025). [2] Shengqu Cai, Ceyuan Yang, Lvmin Zhang, Yuwei Guo, Junfei Xiao, Ziyan Yang, Yinghao Xu, Zhenheng Yang, Alan Yuille, Leonidas Guibas, Maneesh Agrawala, Lu Jiang, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2026. Mixture of Contexts for Long Video Generation. In ICLR .[3] Guibin Chen, Dixuan Lin, Jiangping Yang, Chunze Lin, Junchen Zhu, Mingyuan Fan, Hao Zhang, Sheng Chen, Zheng Chen, Chengcheng Ma, et al . 2025. Skyreels-v2: Infinite-length film generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13074 (2025). [4] Justin Cui, Jie Wu, Ming Li, Tao Yang, Xiaojie Li, Rui Wang, Andrew Bai, Yuanhao Ban, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. 2025. Self-forcing++: Towards minute-scale high-quality video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02283 (2025). [5] David Dinkevich, Matan Levy, Omri Avrahami, Dvir Samuel, and Dani Lischinski. 2025. Story2board: a training-free approach for expressive storyboard generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09983 (2025). [6] Google DeepMind. 2025. Veo: State-of-the-art video generation model. https: //deepmind.google/models/veo/ [7] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Ziyan Yang, Zhibei Ma, Zhijie Lin, Zhenheng Yang, Dahua Lin, and Lu Jiang. 2025. Long Context Tuning for Video Generation. In 

ICCV . 17281–17291. [8] Huiguo He, Huan Yang, Zixi Tuo, Yuan Zhou, Qiuyue Wang, Yuhang Zhang, Zeyu Liu, Wenhao Huang, Hongyang Chao, and Jian Yin. 2025. Dreamstory: Open-domain story visualization by llm-guided multi-subject consistent diffusion. IEEE TPAMI (2025). [9] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 6840–6851. [10] Panwen Hu, Jin Jiang, Jianqi Chen, Mingfei Han, Shengcai Liao, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. StoryAgent: Customized Storytelling Video Generation via Multi-Agent Collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04925 (2024). [11] Kaiyi Huang, Yukun Huang, Xintao Wang, Zinan Lin, Xuefei Ning, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, Yu Wang, and Xihui Liu. 2025. Filmaster: Bridging cinematic principles and generative ai for automated film generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18899 

(2025). [12] Lianghua Huang, Wei Wang, Zhi-Fan Wu, Yupeng Shi, Huanzhang Dou, Chen Liang, Yutong Feng, Yu Liu, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. In-Context LoRA for Diffusion Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23775 (2024). [13] Xun Huang, Zhengqi Li, Guande He, Mingyuan Zhou, and Eli Shechtman. 2025. Self forcing: Bridging the train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08009 (2025). [14] Weinan Jia, Yuning Lu, Mengqi Huang, Hualiang Wang, Binyuan Huang, Nan Chen, Mu Liu, Jidong Jiang, and Zhendong Mao. 2026. MoGA: Mixture-of-Groups Attention for End-to-End Long Video Generation. In ICLR .[15] Ozgur Kara, Krishna Kumar Singh, Feng Liu, Duygu Ceylan, James M Rehg, and Tobias Hinz. 2025. Shotadapter: Text-to-multi-shot video generation with diffusion models. In CVPR . 28405–28415. [16] Weijie Kong, Qi Tian, Zijian Zhang, Rox Min, Zuozhuo Dai, Jin Zhou, Jiangfeng Xiong, Xin Li, Bo Wu, Jianwei Zhang, et al . 2024. HunyuanVideo: A systematic framework for large video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03603 

(2024). [17] Kuaishou. 2025. Kling Video Model. https://kling.kuaishou.com [18] Yitong Li, Zhe Gan, Yelong Shen, Jingjing Liu, Yu Cheng, Yuexin Wu, Lawrence Carin, David Carlson, and Jianfeng Gao. 2019. Storygan: A sequential conditional gan for story visualization. In CVPR . 6329–6338. [19] Han Lin, Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. 2023. Videodirectorgpt: Consistent multi-scene video generation via llm-guided planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15091 (2023). [20] Fuchen Long, Zhaofan Qiu, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei. 2024. VideoStudio: Generating Consistent-Content and Multi-Scene Videos. In ECCV , Vol. 15118. 468–485. [21] Yihao Meng, Hao Ouyang, Yue Yu, Qiuyu Wang, Wen Wang, Ka Leong Cheng, Hanlin Wang, Yixuan Li, Cheng Chen, Yanhong Zeng, Yujun Shen, and Huamin Qu. 2026. HoloCine: Holistic Generation of Cinematic Multi-Shot Long Video Narratives. In CVPR .[22] OpenAI. 2025. GPT-5. https://platform.openai.com/docs/models. Accessed: 2026-04-01. [23] OpenAI. 2025. Sora-2: Video generation model from OpenAI. https://openai. com/index/sora-2/ [24] OpenAI. Accessed: 2025-11-01. Introducing OpenAI o3 and o4-mini. https://openai.com/index/introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/. [25] William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable diffusion models with trans-formers. In ICCV . 4195–4205. [26] Tanzila Rahman, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jian Ren, Sergey Tulyakov, Shweta Mahajan, and Leonid Sigal. 2023. Make-a-story: Visual memory conditioned consistent story generation. In CVPR . 2493–2502. [27] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, et al . 2025. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 (2025). [28] Bo Wang, Haoyang Huang, Zhiying Lu, Fengyuan Liu, Guoqing Ma, Jianlong Yuan, Yuan Zhang, Nan Duan, and Daxin Jiang. 2025. Storyanchors: Generating consistent multi-scene story frames for long-form narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08350 (2025). [29] Jiahao Wang, Hualian Sheng, Sijia Cai, Weizhan Zhang, Caixia Yan, Yachuang Feng, Bing Deng, and Jieping Ye. 2025. EchoShot: Multi-Shot Portrait Video Generation. In NeurIPS .[30] Mengyu Wang, Henghui Ding, Jianing Peng, Yao Zhao, Yunpeng Chen, and Yunchao Wei. 2025. Characonsist: Fine-grained consistent character generation. In ICCV . 16058–16067. [31] Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Kunchang Li, Jiashuo Yu, Xin Ma, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Ping Luo, Ziwei Liu, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. 2023. InternVid: A Large-scale Video-Text Dataset for Multimodal Understanding and Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06942 (2023). [32] Weijia Wu, Zeyu Zhu, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Automated Movie Generation via Multi-Agent CoT Planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07314 (2025). [33] Weijia Wu, Zeyu Zhu, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Automated movie generation via multi-agent cot planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07314 (2025). [34] Junfei Xiao, Ceyuan Yang, Lvmin Zhang, Shengqu Cai, Yang Zhao, Yuwei Guo, Gordon Wetzstein, Maneesh Agrawala, Alan Yuille, and Lu Jiang. 2025. Captain cinema: Towards short movie generation. In ICLR .[35] Zhifei Xie, Daniel Tang, Dingwei Tan, Jacques Klein, Tegawend F Bissyand, and Saad Ezzini. 2024. Dreamfactory: Pioneering multi-scene long video generation with a multi-agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11788 (2024). [36] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al . 2024. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 (2024). [37] Kaiwen Zhang, Liming Jiang, Angtian Wang, Jacob Zhiyuan Fang, Tiancheng Zhi, Qing Yan, Hao Kang, Xin Lu, and Xingang Pan. 2025. StoryMem: Multi-shot Long Video Storytelling with Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19539 (2025). [38] Canyu Zhao, Mingyu Liu, Wen Wang, Weihua Chen, Fan Wang, Hao Chen, Bo Zhang, and Chunhua Shen. 2025. MovieDreamer: Hierarchical Generation for Coherent Long Visual Sequences. In ICLR .[39] Mingzhe Zheng, Yongqi Xu, Haojian Huang, Xuran Ma, Yexin Liu, Wenjie Shu, Yatian Pang, Feilong Tang, Qifeng Chen, Harry Yang, and Ser-Nam Lim. 2025. VideoGen-of-Thought: Step-by-step Generating Multi-Shot Video with Minimal Manual Intervention. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Next-Generation Video .[40] Yupeng Zhou, Daquan Zhou, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jiashi Feng, and Qibin Hou. 2024. Storydiffusion: Consistent self-attention for long-range image and video generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 110315– 110340. [41] Shaobin Zhuang, Kunchang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, and Yali Wang. 2024. Vlogger: Make Your Dream A Vlog. In CVPR . 8806–8817. 

## 8 Appendix 8.1 Case Study 

8.1.1 Inter-shot Video-Text-Memory Synergy. As a supplement to the ablation study analysis, we provide the prompt refinement details in Figure 5. This process illustrates the inter-shot refine-ment mechanism by the Video Analyzer , where next-shot keyframe prompt is refined during video-text-memory synergy. By bridg-ing the underspecified textual intent with the accumulated vi-sual history, this inter-shot refinement ensures that the generated keyframes seamlessly inherit established identities, explicit view-points, and temporally evolved object states (such as the burned-down candle and finished painting). 

8.1.2 Intra-shot Keyframe Regeneration. The keyframe regenera-tion mechanism acts as a critical corrective loop to ensure semantic alignment, as shown in Figure 6. This mechanism addresses prompt-following failures through two distinct approaches. In instances where the model stochastically misses spatial or structural details X. Yin et al. w/o prompt refinement  proposed 

Original : Deep night inside the same study by a tall window. Elias reads alone at the desk in warm candlelight , a heavy book open before him. 

Refined : Deep night inside the same narrow study by a tall window. Elias,…, sits alone at the desk with a heavy book open before him ... Beside the book, a tarnished brass 

candlestick holds a short red candle burned down to about half its original height, its sides marked by softened, uneven melt ed wax drips. 

Original : An ancient city gate of dark stone beneath a cold dawn sky. Sir Aldric, a battle -worn knight in his late 30s with a square jaw , stops before the closed gate , the wind 

moving his cloak lightly. 

Refined : In the pale blue morning light, an ancient city gate of dark stone towers ahead. Sir Aldric,... His deep -red wool cloak, faste ned by a plain metal clasp at the throat, 

billows gently in the chill wind, revealing the large gold phoenix emblem stitched across its back ... He faces the imposing gate , cloak rippling behind him. 

Original : Inside a quiet artist's studio with soft natural light. The female painter is shown from a clear side angle in a strict upp er -body shot after finishing her work . She 

lowers the paintbrush from her hand and gazes at the completed painting in front of her, her profile calm and absorbed. 

Refined : In the same soft natural window light of the quiet artist’s studio. In an upper -body profile view, the young female painter st ands at the familiar wooden easel... She 

gently lowers the thin wooden paintbrush from her right hand while gazing calmly at the finished artwork before her: a single vibrant red rose in full bloom, perched above the 

two tiny vivid -green leaves at the center of the white canvas. Her shoulders are relaxed, as the rose glows softly against the blank canvas.  

> Reference 1: “ red_candle ”
> (base entity: null)
> Other references: “…”
> Reference 1:
> “red_candle_half_burned ”
> (base entity: “ red_candle ”)
> Other references: “…”
> Reference 1: “ Aldric_front ”
> (base entity: null)
> Other references: “…”
> Reference 1: “ Aldric_back ”
> (base entity: “ Aldric_front ”)
> Other references: “…”
> Reference 1:
> “canvas_leaves_wood_easel ”
> (base entity: null)
> Reference 1&2:
> “canvas_with_red_rose ”
> “canvas_leaves_wood_easel ”
> Other references: “…” Other references: “…”

Figure 5: Original vs. refined keyframe prompts by inter-shot synergy, with their retrieved references. 

despite clear instructions—such as failing to accurately depict a char-acter leaning against a bench armrest—direct regeneration without modifying the text often suffices to rectify the oversight (Figure 6, top). Conversely, when the initial prompt contains inherent ambi-guities, such as the phrase "at the door" being misinterpreted as inside an elevator, the mechanism facilitates prompt refinement. By injecting a more explicit description, it eliminates vague phrasing to enforce precise spatial grounding (Figure 6, bottom). By leveraging the robust generative capabilities of GPT-Image-1.5, our pipeline minimizes the necessity for frequent interventions compared to smaller, less capable models. This design choice is strategic: while weaker models might show a larger marginal improvement from regeneration, the increase in inference latency and computational overhead would undermine the practical utility. 

8.1.3 Intra-shot Video Prompt Refinement. After the keyframe es-tablishes the spatial layout and subject positioning, the video mo-tion prompt should be refined to explicitly treat it as the initial frame and incorporate necessary transitional actions. Specifically in Figure 7, the description must account for any spatial gaps, e.g., if the man is initially positioned away from the bonsai, the prompt should include a forward step before pruning, so as to ensure coher-ent motion generation. Without such refinement, a generic prompt may lead to implausible actions (e.g., pruning gestures performed in midair) that fail to align with the established scene geometry. Image Prompt : A stone bench in front of an ancient Baroque building. Ann, a girl around 25, is     

> sleeping soundly leaning against the armrest . Her short black hair …
> Original Image Prompt : …, at the door of a polished metal elevator . Charlie, wearing …, holds a
> thick stack of documents…
> Refined Image Prompt : …, outside the polished metal elevator doors . Charlie, wearing …,
> holds a thick stack of documents… Charlie stands facing the closed metal doors , waiting.
> regen
> regen

Figure 6: Examples of keyframe regeneration resolving prompt-following failures. Top: Direct regeneration corrects structural alignment without altering the prompt. Bottom: Regeneration with a refined prompt resolves spatial ambigu-ity. 

## 8.2 Prompts 

8.2.1 Details of VLM-as-Judge. This section provides the system and user prompts used for our VLM-as-Judge evaluation frame-work. We employ a two-level evaluation strategy. The SHOT JUDGE prompt evaluates individual generated clips against their localized Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video Refined video prompt : Sato steps forward toward the ancient pine bonsai, closing the quiet distance between them . He raises his copper pruners and begins to trim with slow,  

> deliberate motions. Fiery red maple leaves drift down around him as the camera pushes in steadily, capturing the serenity and fo cus of his careful work.
> Original video prompt : Sato slowly prunes an ancient pine bonsai as a few fiery red maple leaves fall around him. The camera pushes in steadily, c apt uring his peaceful labor.

Figure 7: Original vs. refined video prompts by intra-shot synergy. 

descriptions, scoring dimensions such as content match, action match, camera match, and overall adherence. The GLOBAL JUDGE prompt assesses the fully assembled story video against the origi-nal story-level prompt, focusing on high-level coherence metrics including plot completeness, character consistency, narrative flow, and overall adherence. 

> SHOT JUDGE SYSTEM PROMPT

You are an expert video quality evaluator. You will be shown sampled frames (10 evenly spaced) from a short AI-generated video clip, together with the text description used to generate it. Your task is to assess how faithfully the clip matches its description. Respond ONLY with a valid JSON object — no markdown fences, no extra prose. 

> SHOT JUDGE USER PROMPT

Shot description: {description} Examine the video frames provided above and score the clip on the following dimensions (1 = very poor, 5 = excellent): 

• content_match : Do the visible subjects, objects, and setting match the description? 

• action_match : Does the motion or action in the clip match what the description specifies? 

• camera_match : Does the framing, camera angle, and shot type match the description? 

• overall : Overall adherence of this clip to its intended description. Also provide: 

• rationale : One concise sentence naming the most important issue (or "no issues"). Please ignore the visual style and focus on the narrative content and coherence. Return exactly this JSON schema: 

{"content_match": <int 1–5>, "action_match": <int 1–5>, "camera_match": <int 1–5>, "overall": <int 1–5>, "rationale": "<string>" }

> GLOBAL JUDGE SYSTEM PROMPT

You are an expert narrative evaluator for AI-generated long videos. You will be shown frames sampled evenly across a generated video (ordered left-to-right from start to end), together with the original story prompt. Evaluate how faithfully and coherently the video fulfills the story prompt. Respond ONLY with a valid JSON object — no markdown fences, no extra prose. 

> GLOBAL JUDGE USER PROMPT

Original story prompt: {story_prompt} The frames provided above are sampled evenly from the full gener-ated video (chronological order: earliest first, latest last). Score the video on the following dimensions (1 = very poor, 5 = excel-lent): 

• plot_completeness : Are the major story events and beats cov-ered? 

• character_consistency : Do characters appear and behave con-sistently throughout? 

• narrative_flow : Does the visual sequence unfold in a coherent, logical order? 

• overall : Overall story adherence of this video. Also provide: 

• strongest_aspect : The single best aspect of the video (one sen-tence). 

• weakest_aspect : The single most important aspect that should be improved (one sentence). Please ignore the visual style and focus on the narrative content and coherence. Return exactly this JSON schema: 

{"plot_completeness": <int 1–5>, "character_consistency": <int 1–5>, "narrative_flow": <int 1–5>, "overall": <int 1–5>, "strongest_aspect": "<string>", "weakest_aspect": "<string>" }X. Yin et al. 

8.2.2 Prompts of Modules. This section details the system and user prompts that govern the agentic modules of the CoTriSyGen frame-work: the Memory Controller and the Analyzer. These prompts are the core drivers of the closed-loop visual-text-memory syn-ergy. Paragraph 8.2.2.1 outlines the Memory Controller prompt for retrieving and updating entities from keyframe prompts to main-tain a dynamic memory bank. Paragraph 8.2.2.2 presents the Video Analyzer prompt responsible for inter-shot synergy, which distills the generated video into explicit memory updates and refines the keyframe prompt for the subsequent shot. Paragraphs 8.2.2.3 and 8.2.2.4 provide the Image Analyzer prompts driving the intra-shot synergy, which trigger targeted keyframe regeneration and refine the video motion prompt to strictly align with the realized spatial layout. 

8.2.2.1 Memory Controller. 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

Task: From the given keyframe prompt, extract the entities the model should keep consistent. 

PRIORITY ORDER :(1) Main characters (highest priority) (2) Supporting characters, signature props/vehicles. (3) Signature background (lowest priority). 

EXTRACTION RULES :(1) STRICT LIMITS: Output at most 4 entities. Do NOT invent entities not explicitly present or strongly implied by the shots. Prefer fewer, plot-central entities over minor ones. (2) NAMING: Use stable, reusable names. Reuse an existing entity name ONLY if its visual form, state, and viewpoint semantics perfectly match the current shot. (3) DESCRIPTIONS: Each description must be a comprehensive, stan-dalone prompt for image generation. For characters: detail head-to-toe clothing layers and accessories (do NOT force frontal faces; emphasize the most continuity-informative angle and silhouette). For props: specify shape, material, color, and markings. 

EVOLVED ENTITY POLICY (Angles, States & Accessories) :When an existing entity undergoes a continuity-critical visual change, you must treat it as an "Evolved Entity". TRIGGERS FOR EVOLUTION: Create an Evolved Entity ONLY under these three conditions: 

• Viewpoint/Angle Shifts: The shot requires tracking a distinctly different visual side of the entity which OBVIOUSLY brings ap-pearance changes (e.g., front vs. back of a character’s outfit (specific visual details), inner vs. outer face of a shield). 

• State Changes: The entity undergoes obvious physical modification (e.g., severely injured, aged, transformed, or a prop gets broken/-painted). 

• Accessory/Costume Drifts: A character adds or removes continuity-critical clothing layers or accessories that significantly alter their silhouette or cover parts of the body (e.g., donning a heavy coat, scarf, shawl, or hat). 

FORMATTING EVOLVED ENTITIES :

• Naming Convention: Use [BaseName]_[State] (e.g., "Mia_back_outfit", "Kaito_injured", "shield_inner_face"). 

• Linkage: You MUST set the base_entity key to the exact name of the original entity. 

• Description Rule: Do NOT write a new description from scratch. Copy the base entity’s exact description, then append a clear, spe-cific clause detailing the change or angle (e.g., "The same outfit 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

as Mia_front_outfit, but viewed from the back, showing the red backpack and hair ribbons."). 

SIGNATURE BACKGROUND ENTITY RULES :

• Only output ONE background entity (EMPTY scene: no characters and important props) at most. 

• The description MUST be specific and stable (layout, key struc-tures, dominant materials/colors, time-of-day/weather) so it can be reused. 

• Naming convention: use a stable name like "bg_apartment_living_room". 

DUPLICATE AVOIDANCE RULE :

• Before proposing ANY new_entities, you MUST compare against KNOWN ENTITIES carefully. 

• If a KNOWN ENTITY already represents the same identity/state/-form, you MUST output it in use_existing instead of creating a new name. 

• This applies especially to evolved entities already saved in memory. Do NOT create a synonymous new entity name for an already-known evolved state. 

• When an existing front/back entity already matches the needed form, reuse it. Do NOT create another front/back variant with a different name. 

• DO NOT treat an accessory and a character with the accessory as two separate entities if they are visually inseparable. (e.g., a character WEARING a distinctive hat should not be split into "character" + "hat".). 

• The evolved appearance changes of characters from previous shot analysis in the memory bank can be considered higher priority. DO NOT create a new entity if the same evolved state already exists in memory. 

STRICT NON-ENTITY EXCLUSIONS :

• Do NOT create a new entity for temporary actions, poses, gestures, facial expressions, or camera-dependent moments. 

• Do NOT create a new entity for descriptions such as running, walking, turning, looking back, raising a hand, sitting, standing, kneeling, smiling, shouting, or other transient motion states. 

• Do NOT create a new entity for minor nearby props or temporary handheld items unless they are clearly plot-central, recurring, and visually important across shots. 

• Examples of items that are usually NOT entities unless clearly central and recurring: cups, plates, loose papers, random phones, small tools, chairs, table clutter, background decorations. 

• If uncertain whether something should be a new entity, prefer reusing an existing entity or output fewer entities. 

===== OUTPUT FORMAT ===== 

{"retrieved_existing": [ {"name": "<string>"}, ... ], "new_entities": [ {"name": "<string>", "description": "<string>", "base_entity": "<string>" | null}, ... ]}

No extra keys. No markdown. 

> USER PROMPT

KNOWN ENTITIES: current_memory Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

> USER PROMPT

KEYFRAME PROMPT: keyframe_prompt Return the entities needed for THIS shot. Prioritize characters and props. Be conservative on evolving states. 

8.2.2.2 Video Analyzer for Inter-shot Synergy. 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

You are a video continuity analyst for a multi-shot video generation pipeline. You will be shown: (1) Sampled frames from a GENERATED video shot (current shot). (2) The CURRENT entity memory bank. (3) The video motion prompt of the current shot. (4) The original keyframe prompt of the NEXT planned shot. 

YOUR GOALS: 

• A) ENTITY MEMORY UPDATE: Identify entities to add/update in memory from the video clip. 

• B) NEXT SHOT KEYFRAME REFINEMENT: Refine the next shot’s keyframe prompt for visual continuity. 

===== PART A: ENTITY MEMORY UPDATE ===== EXTRACTION SCOPE & PRIORITIES 

• Strict Priority Order: 1) Main Characters (Highest); 2) Signature Props/Vehicles/Animals; 3) Signature Background/Location. 

• Output Limit: Maximum 4 entity updates per shot. Quality over quantity. 

FRAME SELECTION STRATEGY 

• Frame Index: Specify the FRAME INDEX (0-indexed) that best captures the entity. 

• Clearest Frame Imperative: You MUST select the single clearest frame. Prioritize clear lighting (no face shadows), minimal motion blur, minimal occlusion, and maximal visibility of identity-critical details. 

• Angle Flexibility: Frontal faces are NOT mandatory. Choose the viewpoint (front, side, 3/4, or back) that best displays critical visual evidence (e.g., distinctive silhouette, backpack, hairstyle, specific clothing layers, or inner/outer prop surfaces). 

• Background Visibility: For environment entities, choose a frame where the background is most visible and least occluded by char-acters. 

WHEN TO UPDATE You must ONLY output an entity in en-tity_updates if it meets AT LEAST ONE of the following criteria. If no entities qualify, return empty: "entity_updates": [] .

• NEW Entity: A plot-relevant character or prop that does not exist in the current entity memory bank. 

• NEW Angle: A continuity-critical viewpoint (e.g., "charac-ter_back_outfit" vs. "character_front_outfit") not yet represented in memory. Set base_entity to the canonical entity. 

• MAJOR Evolved State: A major, obvious, and persistent visual change. This includes significant costume changes, new acces-sories/layers covering the body (hat, scarf, outerwear), major in-juries, or a prop being destroyed/modified. Set base_entity to the original entity. 

• Comparison: BEFORE outputting any update, compare carefully against the CURRENT entity memory bank. If the same identity/s-tate/form already exists in memory, DO NOT output a renamed duplicate update. Reuse of existing memory is preferred over cre-ating synonymous entities. 

STRICT EXCLUSIONS 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

• Existing Entities: If the entity exists in memory and there is NO major form change, you MUST NOT output it again. 

• Minor Variations: Be VERY conservative. DO NOT create evolved states for minor changes such as: pose/gesture shifts, facial ex-pression changes, lighting/color grading/time-of-day changes, or temporary motion blur/occlusion. 

===== PART B: NEXT SHOT KEYFRAME REFINEMENT===== Basic Rules: 1) Preserve the next shot’s core intent and planned actions; 2) Add continuity details: character states, persistent props; 3) MAINTAIN STYLE CONSISTENCY; 4) Use natural descriptive language (no numbering or special markers). 

MULTI-SHOT INDEPENDENCE & CONTINUITY LIMITS 

• Multi-Shot Nature: Actions, plot events, and camera perspectives do NOT need to be continuous between consecutive shots. 

• Selective Continuity: Inter-shot continuity strictly applies ONLY to main characters’ identities, appearances, and specific persistent props and backgrounds. 

• Prop Independence: Props do not need to appear continuously across all shots. Only include them if explicitly mentioned or logically required. 

ORIGINAL DESCRIPTION PRIORITY 

• Source of Truth: The ORIGINAL next-shot descriptions are the definitive source for visual traits, plot details, and implicit compo-sitions. 

• Strict Feature Adherence: Do NOT alter specified appearance fea-tures (e.g., logos, prints, cartoon motifs) to match a generic "visual style". 

• Preserve Perspective: Do NOT alter the implicit composition or camera position dictated by the original description (e.g., never change an implied frontal view to a side or back view). 

KEYFRAME COMPLETENESS 

• Keyframe Anchor: Defines the FIRST FRAME. Must comprehen-sively detail character appearance (head-to-toe, layers, acces-sories), complete environment details, and character-environment relative positions. 

• Focus: AVOID overly descriptive language on props, background and camera positions. Focus on the main characters and their key accessories. 

• No State Alteration: DO NOT change the initial states of characters (e.g. pose, clothing state, facial expression) in the original keyframe prompt. 

===== OUTPUT FORMAT ===== 

{"entity_updates": [ {"name": "<string>", "description": "<string>", "frame_index": <int>, "base_entity": "<string>" |null}, ... ], "refined_next_shot": { "keyframe_prompt": "<string>" }}

No markdown. No extra keys. 

> USER PROMPT

CURRENT ENTITY MEMORY BANK: 

current_memory X. Yin et al. 

> USER PROMPT

CURRENT SHOT CONTEXT: 

Video prompt: video_prompt 

NEXT SHOT ORIGINAL DESCRIPTIONS: 

Keyframe prompt: next_keyframe_prompt 

VIDEO FRAMES 

The following frames are sampled from the CURRENT shot’s generated video (0-indexed). Analyze these frames to: 1) Identify entities to add or update in memory. 2) Refine the NEXT shot’s keyframe description. Generate the JSON output as specified in the system prompt. 

8.2.2.3 Image Analyzer for Intra-shot Keyframe Evaluation. 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

Input: 

(1) Current generated keyframe image (2) Condition reference images (3) Original keyframe prompt (source of truth) (4) Current keyframe prompt (possibly already refined) (5) Current memory 

EVALUATION FOCUS 

(1) Main character presence and COUNT correctness (missing / du-plicated main characters / deformed human body) (2) Main character appearance alignment (identity cues, outfit/ac-cessories, silhouette) (3) Environment/background alignment 

DECISION RULES 

• If main character count is missing/duplicated/repeated incorrectly, return: "decision": "regen_same_desc" and DO NOT rewrite de-scription. 

• If there is a clear and material mismatch in main character ap-pearance or environment/background that changes identity, key wardrobe/props, or the intended setting, while core subjects are still correct, return: "decision": "regen_refined_desc" and provide a minimally adjusted description. 

• If the image preserves the correct main subjects and overall scene intent, accept minor or non-critical differences in facial details, pose, clothing wrinkles, small accessory details, lighting, composi-tion, or background details. 

• Minor appearance drift or minor environment/background drift should NOT trigger regeneration. 

• If sufficiently aligned overall, return: "decision": "accept". 

DESCRIPTION REWRITE CONSTRAINTS 

• Keep original intent and entities. Do NOT invent new characters, props, events, or story beats. 

• Do NOT over-imagine. Only adjust emphasis and add small conti-nuity details. 

• Preserve proper nouns exactly. 

• Prefer acceptance over regeneration when differences are subtle, ambiguous, or unlikely to materially improve with another gener-ation. 

===== OUTPUT FORMAT ===== 

{"decision": "accept" | "regen_same_desc" |"regen_refined_desc", "reasons": ["<string>", ...], "alignment_report": { 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

"main_character_count": "ok" | "missing" | "duplicate" | "unclear", "main_character_appearance": "ok" | "partial" |"mismatch" | "unclear", "environment": "ok" | "partial" | "mismatch" |"unclear" }, "refined_keyframe_prompt": "<string>" }

Rules: 

• "refined_keyframe_prompt" is required only when decision is "re-gen_refined_desc". 

• For other decisions, set "refined_keyframe_prompt" to "". 

• No markdown. No extra keys. 

> USER PROMPT

ORIGINAL KEYFRAME PROMPT: 

original_keyframe_prompt 

CURRENT KEYFRAME PROMPT: 

current_keyframe_prompt 

ENTITY BANK SUMMARY: 

current_memory 

IMAGE ORDER: 

• Image 1: current generated keyframe 

• Images 2..N: condition reference images Review the alignment and return the strict JSON. 

8.2.2.4 Image Analyzer for Intra-shot Video Prompt Refinement. 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

Input: 

(1) A GENERATED keyframe image (the first frame of the upcoming video shot) (2) The keyframe prompt used to generate this keyframe (3) The original video prompt of this shot 

Goal: Rewrite the video prompt so it starts from the exact visual con-tent of the keyframe image, then describes the temporal progression. Use the keyframe prompt as a textual reference for what the keyframe depicts, but always prioritize the actual image content when they conflict. 

START FROM THE KEYFRAME 

• The keyframe image is the ground truth for the video’s first frame. 

• Your refined video motion prompt MUST begin with a brief first-frame anchor: character appearance and positions kept concise and consistent with the keyframe prompt — do NOT elaborate on clothing layers, accessories, background props, or architectural details. 

ACTION NARRATION 

• The core of the description is CHARACTER ACTIONS AND INTERACTIONS : character-to-character interactions (dialogue, gestures, physical contact, eye contact, reactions) and character-to-prop interactions (picking up, using, holding, operating objects). 

• These interactions MUST be the most prominent and detailed part of the description. They must NOT be buried under or diluted by appearance, environment, or atmosphere descriptions. Closed-Loop Triplet Synergistic Generation for Long-Form Video 

> SYSTEM PROMPT

• Allocate the majority of the description’s length and specificity to actions and interactions. 

ACTIONS MUST FOLLOW THE ORIGINAL VIDEO MOTION PROMPT 

• The temporal progression (what happens after the first frame) 

MUST follow the original video motion prompt faithfully. 

• Do NOT add, invent, or remove any main actions or plot beats. 

• Minor wording adjustments for fluency are allowed, but the action sequence must remain the same. 

FORBIDDEN MOTIONS 

• No close-to-wide or wide-to-close shot transitions within a single shot. 

• No sudden perspective changes. 

===== OUTPUT FORMAT ===== 

{"refined_video_motion_prompt": "<string>" }

No markdown. No extra keys. 

> USER PROMPT

Keyframe prompt (keyframe reference): 

keyframe_prompt 

ORIGINAL video motion prompt: 

original_video_prompt 

KEYFRAME IMAGE: 

The image below is the generated keyframe (first frame) for this shot. Rewrite the video motion prompt starting from this keyframe’s visual content, then follow the original action sequence. Generate the JSON output as specified in the system prompt.