Title: Learning to Evolve Scenes: Reasoning about Human Activities with Scene Graphs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02425v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 01:24:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Evolve Scenes: Reasoning about Human Activities with Scene Graphs 

Francesca Pistilli 

Politecnico di Torino Torino, Italy 

francesca.pistilli@polito.it 

Simone Alberto Peirone 

Politecnico di Torino Torino, Italy 

simone.peirone@polito.it 

Giuseppe Averta 

Politecnico di Torino Torino, Italy 

giuseppe.averta@polito.it 

## Abstract 

Understanding human behavior while interacting with the surrounding world is crucial for many applications of embodied AI. First-person videos are particularly informative for this problem, as they well capture how activities reshape the scene over time. However, existing approaches often rely on implicit visual or language-aligned representations, disregarding structured reasoning over the scene dynamic. We argue that explicit, compositional and editable representations of human-environment interactions can play a crucial role for rich grounded activity understanding. To this end, we introduce SG-Ego, a large scale annotation set extending Ego4D with spatio-temporal scene graphs, where relations triplets are consolidated over time into explicit time-evolving descriptions of the scene state. To reason over this representation, we propose GLEN, a graph-based model that operates over scene graph sequences to both align them with textual actions and model their temporal evolution. In addition, we formulate the activity-driven graph-edit forecasting (A-GEF) problem, a novel task that casts scene dynamics as a sequence of structured transformations conditioned on ongoing actions, enabling explicit reasoning about how scenes change over time. We validate our approach across multiple downstream tasks, spanning retrieval benchmarks as EgoMCQ and EgoCVR, as well as long-horizon reasoning benchmarks as EXPLORE-Bench and the newly introduced A-GEF. GLEN achieves strong results compared to raw video baselines and it excels in reasoning settings, typically addressed only with MLLMs, while enabling controllable and structured predictions of scene dynamics driven by human activities. We believe our results establish spatio-temporal scene graphs, together with models that reason over them, as strong compositional and interpretable representations for video understanding and potentially beyond. Project page with code at https://francescapistilli.github.io/GLEN .

## 1 Introduction 

Despite rapid progress in video understanding, modeling how scenes evolve under human actions remains a fundamental challenge. Reasoning over these transformations is crucial for embodied AI systems that have to plan, forecast and act in shared dynamic environments [1, 2]. First-person videos [ 3] are particularly suited to support this kind of reasoning, thanks to their interaction-centered focus on how actions reshape the scene status over time. Despite significant 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2607.02425v1 [cs.CV] 2 Jul 2026

Figure 1: Reasoning over evolving scenes. Different activities induce structured changes in a scene over time. We formulate this process as activity-conditioned graph edit forecasting (A-GEF), where the temporal evolution of a scene is modeled as graph edits conditioned on an activity description. interest of the community on this topic [ 4 –7], current approaches typically handle egocentric video understanding similarly to other computer vision tasks, relying on large-scale trainings to learn compact latent representations from raw pixels or dense visual features. While effective in many practical cases, such approaches entangle objects, interactions, and their temporal dynamics into a single embedding space, making it difficult to reason about how and why a scene changes over time. Approaches that include textual narrations like [ 5, 6 ] move from purely visual to visual and semantic features, but still rely on implicit representations. The core limitation of these works is not merely a lack of semantics, but rather the absence of an explicit, editable and compositional representation of the human-scene interaction. Without such structure, it remains challenging to attribute changes in the scene to specific actions or to reason about how the scene evolves under different activities. We argue that this can be addressed by structured representations in the form of sequences of scene graphs, where objects and the human are represented as nodes and their functional or spatial relation as edges. This recasts video understanding tasks from a passive feature extraction to an explicit activity-conditioned reasoning over scene structure, with temporal dynamics expressed as structured transformations of scene state rather than implicit shifts in latent embeddings. In other words, sequences of scene graphs provide an interpretable, compositional and editable representation that naturally supports reasoning about what changed, why , and how the scene evolves over time .While scene graphs have been studied in other contexts like generation from image or video [ 8–10 ] or future scene anticipation [ 11 – 13 ], prior works remain fundamentally passive and limited to existing benchmarks, disregarding the activity that generates the scene change. In this work we go beyond existing paradigms and introduce activity-driven graph edit forecasting , a novel approach for activity understanding that maps the dynamic evolution of a scene conditioned by human activities as edits on a scene graph, see Fig. 1. First, we introduce SG-Ego, a large-scale annotation set for Ego4D of spatio-temporal scene graphs, where relational triplets are automatically annotated and then consolidated over time to deliver time-controlled evolving scene descriptions. Then, we propose GLEN (Graph-Language Edit Network), a graph neural network trained for graph-language alignment and activity-conditioned graph edits predictions to model scene evolution. Finally, we introduce 

activity-driven graph-edit forecasting (A-GEF), a novel formulation that models scene dynamics as a sequence of structured transformations over scene graphs conditioned on the ongoing actions, enabling explicit and interpretable reasoning about how scenes evolve over time. We validate the quality and completeness of our scene graph annotations on EgoSchema [ 7], showing that scene graph sequences provide rich semantic information. Then, we demonstrate that such representations can be exploited with minimal loss of information compared to raw videos, achieving competitive or state-of-the-art performance on retrieval tasks such as EgoMCQ [ 5] and Ego-CVR [ 14 ], a challenging compositional video retrieval benchmark. Finally, GLEN achieves state-of-the-art results on reasoning tasks, including EXPLORE-Bench [ 15 ] and A-GEF, showing that explicit structured representations can effectively replace or complement black-box MLLMs. Our results highlight how structured representations improve both language grounding and temporal reasoning, while enabling a new class of tasks centered on predicting and manipulating scene dynamics. More broadly, our work advocates for a shift toward structured, explicit representations in egocentric video understanding - moving from describing what is observed to reasoning about how actions transform the scene state. 22 Related Works 

Video Scene Graph. Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to represent visual scenes as graphs where objects are the nodes and their relationships are the edges. Recent progress has been driven by transformer-based architectures, which enable end-to-end relational reasoning and have become a dominant paradigm in image-based SGG [ 16 , 17 ]. Alongside architectural advances, substantial effort has addressed the long-tailed distribution of predicates through debiasing and knowledge-aware methods [ 18 ] and on scaling structured supervision. Synthetic Visual Genome [ 19 ] and its video extension [ 20 ] enable large-scale extraction of scene graphs from images and videos, improving data availability for relational learning. In parallel, large language models have been leveraged to improve weakly supervised SGG via better triplet extraction and alignment [ 21 ]. Extending SGG to videos introduces the challenge of modeling temporal dynamics. Action Genome [ 8 ] formalized video scene graph generation (VidSGG), followed by approaches using spatio-temporal transformers and relational reasoning for dynamic interactions [ 9, 10 ]. Recent work further improves robustness and expressivity through bias mitigation [ 22 ] and richer structures such as hierarchical and hypergraph representations [ 11 , 23 ]. Beyond generation, scene graph anticipation methods predict future graphs from past observations, modeling temporal evolution directly in graph space [ 11 , 12 ]. However, these approaches remain unconditioned, relying solely on past visual input and failing to model the human activity driving scene changes, limiting controllability over future outcomes. Recently, scene graphs have been adopted as structured representations for downstream video understanding tasks. For long-horizon reasoning tasks, graph-based representations enable more effective compositional and relational reasoning [ 24 –27 ]. Recent approaches further explore graph-based memory and reasoning mechanisms for long-video understanding [ 11 , 28 , 29 ]. Despite their success, these methods primarily use scene graphs as auxiliary structures for reasoning or question answering, rather than as a unified representation of scene dynamics. In contrast, we treat scene graphs as a controllable and evolving state, introducing an activity-conditioned formulation where temporal changes are explicitly modeled through graph edit operations. 

Graph Edit Models. Graph Edit Distance (GED) [ 30 ] is a classical framework for measuring dissim-ilarity between graphs by computing the minimum-cost sequence of edit operations, as node/edge insertions, deletions, and substitutions, required to transform one graph into another. Since the exact computation of GED is NP-hard, a range of approximations have been proposed, including heuristics strategies [ 31 , 32 ], bipartite matching [ 33 , 34 ], and learning-based methods [ 35 – 37 ]. Recently, Graph Edit Networks (GENs) [ 37 ] have reformulated graph transformation as a learning problem, where neural networks are trained to predict sequences of edit operations between graph pairs. In partic-ular, GENs employ a linear output layer over node representations to produce local edit decisions, including node-level insertions, deletions, and attribute modifications. This formulation enables efficient inference of graph transformations through independent per-node predictions, and leverages learned representations to parameterize edit operations in a data-driven manner. However, existing GEN formulations primarily address unconditional graph-to-graph transformation, where edits are inferred solely from the source and target graphs. In contrast, our setting considers conditioned graph evolution, where graph transformations are explicitly influenced by high-level contextual information, requiring the model to adapt its edit decisions based on external conditions. 

## 3 SG-Ego 

Notation. We define a spatio-temporal scene graph as a directed multi-edge graph 

Gi = ( Vi, E i, Xi, Yi), where Vi is the set of object nodes and Ei ⊆ Vi × Vi is the set of directed edges representing pairwise relations. Each node v ∈ Vi corresponds to an object instance in the scene, to which it is associated a set of attributes Xi ∈ R|Vi|× d, including its visual features (extracted from the object crop), the corresponding bounding box, and a semantic label describing the category of the object. Each edge (u, v ) ∈ Ei captures a spatial or functional relation from u to v

and it is associated with a set of attributes Yi ∈ R|Ei|× r comprising the semantic label describing the relation. Each scene graph Gi covers a variable temporal window, summarizing all the relations within the window. In particular, we define Gt as the spatial scene graphs associated with frame t and 

Gt:t+T as the spatio-temporal scene graph associated with the temporal window from frame t to t+T .3Dataset Collection. We collect SG-Ego, a large scale annotation set of spatio-temporal scene graphs from videos of human activities, based on the Ego4D [ 3] dataset, consisting of 3.8M spatio-temporal scene graphs annotated through a training-free pipeline. We define a set of Nobj = 1480 node labels and Nrel = 387 relations labels. Each sample spans a temporal window [t, t + T ] and is associated with the initial spatial scene graph Gt, a spatio-temporal scene graph over the entire temporal window 

Gt:t+T and a textual narration act t. For Graph-Text Alignment, we define a training split consisting of 3.8M spatio-temporal scene graphs ( SG-Ego Align ). For A-GEF, we define a training set and a validation set of approximately 360k and 7.2k tuples (Gt, act t, G t:t+T ). We name this split SG-Ego Edit . These samples are taken from a broad set of videos, following the same scenario distribution of the Ego4D dataset to ensure diversity. 

3.1 Annotation Pipeline 

SG-Ego implements a training-free VidSGG strategy divided into three stages. Our pipeline maps a sequence of T frames into a single temporally consistent spatio-temporal scene graphs Gt:t+T ,capturing all the spatial and functional relations in the video. We follow a bottom-up approach to extract a rich set of frame-level relations, ground them with a open vocabulary detection model and build a temporally consistent scene graph of the temporal window. Here, we provide a description of the annotation process, see Sec. A for further implementation details and qualitative visualizations. 

Stage 1: Frame-level relations extraction. Given a video V, we first extract frames at a constant sampling rate τ = 5 fps. Then, we prompt a MLLM (Qwen3.5 9B [ 38 ]) to describe the spatial and functional relations appearing in the frame, avoiding unnecessary details related to the appearance of the object or the environments. We instruct the model to directly produce (subject_x, relation, object_y) triplets, where the _x and _y track the specific instances of the entities. Then, we use rule-based filtering to remove malformed or duplicated triplets. For each frame, the captioning pipeline outputs a list of candidate frame-level triplets Ti.

Stage 2: Frame-level relations grounding. We use GroundingDINO [ 39 ] to ground each candidate frame-level triplet Ti in the image. Specifically, we concatenate the subject, predicate, and object into a single sentence and feed it to the detector. We then extract the queries aligned with the textual spans corresponding to the subject and object, and use them to obtain candidate detections for each entity in the triplet. We use the tracking suffixes from the captions to merge multiple detections from the same object, and apply a set of heuristics to drop duplicates and filter invalid spatial relations (e.g., to the right , inside , etc...). The resulting objects and relations define the nodes and edges of the frame-level graph, respectively. From the valid detections, we extract the node attributes consisting of the bounding box and semantic label of the object. Objects and relations from the captions are mapped to a fixed set of Nobj = 1480 object and Nrel = 387 classes respectively. The output of the grounding stage at frame t is a frame-level spatial scene graph Gt = ( Vt, E t, Xt, Yt).

Stage 3: Graph consolidation across frames. Each frame-level scene graph provides a partial view of the ongoing interactions in the video, due to occlusions or omitted triplets by the captioner. Given a sequence Gt, . . . , G t+T , the consolidation process C merge them into a single spatio-temporal scene graph that includes all nodes and relations observed during the timespan [ 40 ]. Objects correspondences are established via a semantic tracking pipeline based on SAM2 [ 41 ]and DINOv2 [ 42 ]. More specifically, starting from a pair of graphs Gt and Gt+1 , we extract object masks with SAM2 and propagate them from Gt to Gt+1 . We compute IoU between propagated and detected masks at each frame, and use Hungarian matching to associate tracked and detected objects with IoU > 0.5. To improve robustness, we additionally match objects based on DINOv2 feature similarity when tracking fails. The merged graph includes all matched and unmatched nodes and inherits relations from both graphs. This process is repeated sequentially over time to obtain the final consolidated graph Gt:t+T .

## 4 Method 

We formulate the dynamic evolution of a scene as a novel setting called activity-conditioned graph edit forecasting (A-GEF), in which we ask a model to forecast how a spatial scene graph Gt will change based on the activity described in act t. To do this, we consider a conditional formulation in which future graph edits are predicted given both the current graph and the upcoming activity. Our approach Graph-Language Edit Network (GLEN), see Fig. 2, consists of three main components. 4Figure 2: The GLEN architecture for Action-conditioned Graph Edit Forecasting (A-GEF). 

The model takes a spatial graph Gt and a conditioning action act t and predicts the necessary edit to evolve the scene graph into the consolidated Gt+T . For Graph-Text Alignment (GTA), we extract a graph embedding from Gt+T and align it with the text embedding of act t.The Graph Encoder FG : G 7 → Rd maps from the space of scene graphs Gt to d-dimensional embeddings, while the Text Encoder FT : T 7 → Rd maps act t from the text space T into the same embedding space. By leveraging a Graph-Text Alignment (GTA), the model can learn a versatile representation that summarizes the state of the scene and enable spatially grounded reasoning about the objects and relations in the scene. Finally, the Graph Edit Model E : ( G, T ) 7 → G defines text-conditioned transformations over the scene graph Gt, allowing structured modifications based on the given activity description. We represent an action as a triplet (Gt, act t, G t:t+T ), where Gt is the initial scene graph at times-tamp t, act t is a textual description of the activity starting at t, and Gt:t+T is the final scene graph after the activity concludes. Given such triplets, GLEN is trained to (i) align the embedding of Gt:t+T

with the embedding of the action textual description act t via an alignment objective (GTA) and (ii) transform Gt into the final graph Gt:t+T through the Graph Edit Model E (A-GEF). 

4.1 Graph-Text Alignment 

We formulate the Graph-Text Alignment task as the problem of learning a joint embedding space in which a spatio-temporal scene graph is aligned with the textual description of the activities occurring within the corresponding temporal window. We train GLEN with Graph-Text Contrastive Alignment (GTCA) and Graph-Text Matching (GTM) . Our goal is to learn a versatile representation that summarizes the scene graph in a single text-aligned embedding, enabling grounded reasoning about the spatial and functional relations in the scene. 

Embeddings extraction. We define a Graph Encoder FG : G 7 → Rd that maps from the space of scene graphs G into d-dimensional embeddings, and a Text Encoder FT : G 7 → Rd that maps the textual narrations into the same embedding space. For a scene-graph activity pair (G, act ), we define their corresponding embeddings as hg and hact . FG is composed of L TripletGCN layers [ 43 ], where each layer at depth l updates the node embeddings x(l) 

> j

through message passing: 

x(l+1)  

> j

= xj + ϕ2( mean  

> i∈Neigh (j)

ϕ1(xi|| yi→j || xj )) , (1) where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are MLPs and Neigh (j) is the set of neighbors of node j. A similar update rule applies to the edge embeddings yi. By jointly updating node and edge features, the Graph Encoder learns context-aware representations that capture the spatial and semantic structure of the current scene. We alternate message passing and cross attention layers to update the node embeddings X(l)

with the text tokens Hact from the narrations: 

˜X(l+1) = LN 

h

X(l+1) + αCA (X(l+1) , Hact )

i

, (2) where LN is the layer norm operator and α controls the contribution of the CA . Finally, the encoder outputs a single graph embedding hg,i by average pooling all the node X(L) and edge Y(L)

embeddings at the final layer, followed by a MLP projection. Depending on the task, we enable or disable the cross attention modules. For Graph-Text Alignment, we train only the Graph Encoder FG

and Text Encoder FT to align the graph embedding of Gt:t+T to the textual embedding of act t.

Graph-Text Contrastive Alignment (GTCA). Given a batch B = {(G, act )i}|B| 

> i=1

, consisting of |B| 

scene graphs paired with their corresponding textual narrations, we push the model to map close in 5the embedding space paired graph-text samples, while pushing unpaired samples further apart. We define the batches such that there are at least two samples from the same video to make the model more robust to subtle variations in the scene graphs extracted from the same video. Formally, we define the graph-to-text contrastive alignment loss Lg2t as: 

Lg2t = 1

|B|

X

> i∈B

P 

> k∈P i

exp (hTg,i hact,k /τ )

P 

> k∈N i

exp (hTg,i hact,k /τ ) , (3) where Pi is the set of positive samples for the anchor sample i, defined as the samples from the batch that share at least one verb and noun labels from the narration act t, and Ni is the set of negative samples from the same video as sample i. We define the symmetric text-to-graph contribution Lt2g in a similar way. For GTCA, we disable the Cross Attention layers, keeping the two encoders separate. 

Graph-Text Matching (GTM). To encourage the network to distinguish subtle differences in the scene graphs, we introduce an additional Graph-Text Matching objective [ 6 , 44 ]. Specifically, we mine hard positive pairs and negative pairs from the batch based on the similarity of their graph and text embeddings, enable the CA layers and feed them to the encoders. The resulting embeddings are then passed to a MLP h to predict whether the pair is positive or negative. 

4.2 Activity-conditioned Graph Edit Forecasting (A-GEF) Problem formulation. Given a sequence of graphs {Gt, G t+1 , . . . , G t+T }, a Graph Edit Network takes as input a spatial graph Gt and predict a set of edits that transform it into Gt+1 [37 ]. A graph edit function δ : G → G is defined as a composition of elementary edit operations which includes node deletion (removing node i and its incident edges), node insertion (adding a new node with attribute 

x), node replacement (updating the attribute of node i to x), edge deletion (removing edge (i, j )), and edge insertion (adding edge (i, j )). These operations form the basis of the graph edit formulation. In our setting, we extend this formulation to action-conditioned graph edit forecasting . Given the initial scene graph Gt and a textual description of the activity act t starting at timestamp t, the goal is to predict the final scene graph Gt:t+T . Unlike standard graph edit networks [ 37 ], which model graph evolution purely as a function of the current graph, in our case the dynamic evolution of the graph is conditioned by the activity. This conditioning is crucial in our setting, as scene evolution is inherently driven by human actions and the same scene graph will likely evolve differently depending on the activity being performed. Differently from the standard formulation, we do not explicitly model node replacement operations. Instead, we restrict the edit space to node deletions and node insertions, and express changes in node attributes through a delete-and-insert mechanism. 

The Graph Edit Model. We design a Graph Edit Model E : ( G, T ) 7 → G that predicts graph transformations explicitly conditioned on the future activity. We first encode the initial graph Gt

using the Graph Encoder FG described in Sec. 4.1, obtaining node Znt and edge Zet embeddings. For the editing objective, the cross-attention layers between node embeddings and text tokens and the graph pooling are disabled; therefore, both node and edge representations correspond directly to the output of the L-layer TripletGCN module. We then augment the graph structure by adding a fixed number K of learnable node queries, which act as candidate slots for potential future objects. These queries are initialized as learnable embeddings and appended to the set of node features, taking inspiration from [ 17 ]. Next, we construct a fully connected graph over this augmented node set. Edges involving the newly introduced query nodes are initialized with noisy features, providing no prior structural bias and allowing the model to freely infer their connectivity and semantics. After this step, we obtain a noised graph ˜Gt = ( ˜Vt, ˜Et, ˜Znt , ˜Zet ), with ˜Vt = |Vt| + K nodes and | ˜Vt| × | ˜Vt| edges. We condition the augmented graph on the text embedding of the action hact = FT (act t) through a Cross-Attention layer, allowing both node and edge features to be conditioned by the action: 

˜Zn,cond t = ˜Znt + CA (˜Znt , hact ), ˜Ze,cond t = ˜Zet + CA (˜Zet , hact ). (4) This allows the model to modulate the entire graph based on the conditioning action, effectively injecting activity-dependent signals into the relational structure. The conditioned graph is then processed by a second graph encoder, called Graph Edit Encoder FEdit , built as a stack of TripletGCN layers, which propagates the activity-aware information via edge-aware message passing. The graph encoder FEdit maps ˜Gt into a set of graph edits. Specifically, the node embeddings at the last layer of the model Znt are fed to a node update head , which outputs a object category score yi ∈ RNobj +1 .6This score assigns each node to one of Nobj categories or to a special no object class. Assigning a node from Gt to the no object class corresponds to a node deletion , while assigning a valid class to a query node corresponds to node insertion with a specific node label. Edge edits are processed trough two separate heads to predict the edge deletion score zdel i ∈ R 1 and its semantic labels zcls i ∈ R Nrel ,possibly more than one. This jointly captures edge deletion (by suppressing existing edges) and edge insertion (by activating edges involving query nodes with predicted relation labels). We train the network by directly supervising graph edit operations. Ground-truth correspondences are established between nodes in Gt and Gt:t+T using visual features and node labels with a one-to-one mapping, while the additional K query nodes are matched via Hungarian assignment based on label costs. Unmatched predictions are assigned to the no object class. Based on these matches, we supervise edge updates and deletions by comparing predicted edges with ground-truth edges between matched node pairs. Given directed multi-edge graphs, edge classification is modeled as a multi-label task over Nrel classes per node pair. Edge deletion is formulated as a binary task indicating whether at least one edge exists between two nodes. We use cross-entropy for node classification and binary cross-entropy for edge update and deletion. 

## 5 Experiments 

We validate SG-Ego and GLEN on several benchmark. On EgoSchema [ 7], we demonstrate that the proposed scene graph annotations provide a structured and complete representation of the scene that can support long range reasoning about human activities. On EgoMCQ [ 5] and EgoCVR [ 45 ], we show that the graph embeddings produced by GLEN are well aligned with the textual description of the corresponding ongoing human activities. Finally, on A-GEF and EXPLORE-Bench, we assess the capability of GLEN to predict the dynamic evolution of a scene given an activity. 

Implementation details. For the Graph-Text Alignment tasks (EgoMCQ and EgoCVR), we extract the visual and semantic embeddings of nodes and edges using the Perception-Encoder [ 46 ] backbone. For A-GEF and EXPLORE-Bench, we use DINOv2 [ 42 ] for the visual embeddings and MiniLM [ 47 ]for the semantic embeddings. We initialize the Text Encoder FT from the EgoVLP [5] text encoder and keep it frozen. We use three and two TripletGCN layers for FG, and FEdit , respectively. The embedding size is set to d = 512 for the FG and d = 256 for FEdit . For GTA, we mine n = 3 

negative samples for each anchor in the batch. For A-GEF, we set K = 128 node queries. Ablations are reported in Sec. B. The backbones used to initialize the node and edge embeddings are kept frozen and we train only the Graph Encoders and a small projection head on top of the Text Encoder. We train our models on a single A100 GPU for approx. 24 hours. 

5.1 Long-Range Reasoning and Summarization on EgoSchema 

The scene graphs produced by SG-Ego capture the relevant spatial and functional interactions in the scene and provide a compact, compositional and editable summary of the ongoing activities happening in the video. We validate the quality and completeness of our scene graphs on EgoSchema [ 7 ], a diagnostic benchmark used to evaluate long-horizon temporal, causal, and intent reasoning over first-person video sequences, by providing a Large Language Model (Qwen3.5-9B[ 38 ]) uniformly sampled scene graphs from the video. Specifically, we convert the graph triplets into textual form and prompt the model to answer questions based solely on the scene state described by these graphs. This configuration achieves close performance compared to the model with full access to the raw frames (66.0% v. 72.8%), showing that the scene graphs encode sufficient details about the scene to let the model understand extended, temporally complex video content, as shown in Table 1(left). Table 1: Long-Range Rseasoning on EgoSchema [ 7] and Graph-Text Alignment on EgoMCQ [ 5]. 

On EgoSchema, we validate the quality and completeness of SG-Ego. On EgoMCQ, we show that the graph embeddings from GLEN are well-aligned with the caption of the ongoing activities.                   

> Method EgoSchema (val) Acc.
> EgoThinker [48] 71.8 Qwen3.5-9B (Blind) 38.2 Qwen3.5-9B (Frames) 72.8 Qwen3.5-9B (SG-Ego) 66.0
> Qwen3.5-9B (Frames + SG-Ego) 73.2 Method EgoMCQ Inter EgoMCQ Intra
> EgoVLP [5] 90.6 57.2 HierVL [49] 90.5 52.4 EgoVLPv2 [6] 91.0 60.9
> HiERO (EgoVLP) [50] 91.6 59.6
> GLEN (Perc. Enc.) 91.2 56.2

7Table 2: Composed Video Retrieval on EgoCVR [ 14 ], measured in terms of Recall@k. Candidate clips are either from the same ( local ) or different videos ( global ) as the query.                                                            

> Method Global Local
> R@1 R@5 R@10 R@1 R@2 R@3 Random 0.01 0.05 0.1 25.3 38.2 50.7 CLIP 7.4 33.2 55.3 26.1 43.4 57.7 BLIP CoV R [51] †5.4 15.2 24.3 33.1 49.5 62.9 BLIP CoV R −ECDE [45] †6.0 14.8 24.3 33.4 49.3 63.0 CIReVL [52] 2.0 6.8 10.2 21.6 35.1 46.0 TFR-CVR [14] 14.1 39.5 54.4 44.2 61.0 73.2 Thawakar et.al [53] †14.6 41.3 54.9 44.8 61.7 74.0 GLEN 15.3 40.3 56.9 47.7 64.8 76.3
> †Finetuned on WebVid-CoVR or Dense-WebVid-CoV for CVR.

5.2 Graph-Text Alignment on EgoMCQ 

EgoMCQ [ 5] consists of 39k multiple-choice text-to-video questions where, given a textual narration, the model has to select the correct video clip between five candidates. We report Inter-Video accuracy, where clips are from different videos, and Intra-Video accuracy, where they are from the same video in in Table 1(right). We achieve performance comparable to video-language models end-to-end 

fine-tuned for multimodal contrastive alignment, despite relying on a significantly more compact and structured representation of the video input. 

5.3 Composed Video Retrieval on EgoCVR 

In Composed Video Retrieval (CVR), the model is tasked to retrieve a video that matches a reference clip after applying a textual modification, i.e., given a source video and a query describing a change in its content, the model must identify the correct video among a set of candidates that matches the modified scene. We approach this task by directly leveraging the graph–text alignment branch of GLEN. Unlike EgoMCQ, which is focused on action-level dynamics, CVR requires more fine-grained reasoning about the compositional structure of the scene and how the instruction query changes it. Notably, our approach is entirely training-free as we do not train or fine-tune for this downstream task. We validate GLEN on EgoCVR [ 14 ], a CVR benchmark with 2295 samples, each consisting of a query clip , an instruction representing the intended modification and a set of candidate clips to choose from. We follow the original EgoCVR formulation, extracting a text embedding from the query clip caption augmented with the modification instructions. Then, we seek for the best match among the available candidates through cosine similarity with their graph embeddings. To preserve visual consistency between the query and candidate clips, which can otherwise be overshadowed by semantic similarity, we follow TFR-CVR [ 14 ] and introduce a preliminary visual filtering step that selects the top-nc candidates based on similarity to the reference clip. We chose to implement it with CLIP features, ensuring generality without introducing task-specific bias. Results in Table 2 show that GLEN achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming even methods specifically trained for CVR. We argue that the scene graph based structure of GLEN allows the model to better reason about the spatial and functional relations in the input clips, which is crucial for reasoning about the fine-grained modifications induced by the query. 

5.4 Scene Evolution on A-GEF benchmark 

We evaluate the scene evolution capabilities of GLEN on A-GEF built on SG-Ego, see Sec. 4.2. Following standard scene graph evaluation protocols, we evaluate the quality of the predicted graph 

ˆGt:t+T using triplet Recall @K over (subject, relation, object ) tuples. We introduce an entropy-based filtering strategy to handle uncertainty in node generation, where we remove nodes for which predicted class entropy exceeds a threshold of 0.5. This reduces noise from ambiguous object assignments and provides a more reliable evaluation on confident predictions. We compare GLEN with two baselines: a static approach that replicates Gt as the ˆGt:t+T prediction, and a baseline based on Qwen 3.5[ 38 ]. For the latter, we provide the model with the list of triplets from the start graph in a textual format, along with the list of possible objects and relations, and ask the model to predict the triplets of the target scene. We observe that the LLM predicts few triplets, which leaves the recall unchanged at different K values. Our model consistently outperforms both baselines, as shown in Table 3, demonstrating the effectiveness of explicitly modeling activity-conditioned graph edits for 8Table 3: A-GEF on SG-Ego . The static approach replicates Gt as the final ˆGt:t+T prediction.              

> Method Triplet Recall
> R@20 R@50 R@100 Qwen3.5-9B [38] 9.14 9.14 9.14
> Gt(static )23.17 23.17 23.17
> GLEN 35.06 43.92 48.49

Table 4: Long horizon reasoning on EXPLORE-Bench [15]. Full table in Sec B.3                                                            

> Methods Short Medium Long Full
> Sobj Srel Sobj Srel Sobj Srel Sobj Srel
> GPT-5.2-Chat 59.91 2.70 59.88 2.65 58.06 2.61 59.69 2.67 Gemini-3-Pro 61.29 2.77 60.99 2.74 59.17 2.70 60.94 2.75 LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B 53.25 2.51 51.21 2.44 47.62 2.41 51.87 2.47 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct 61.34 2.84 60.78 2.81 56.83 2.71 60.63 2.82
> Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking 63.77 2.85 62.61 2.78 58.02 2.63 62.70 2.80
> GLEN 66.12 2.67 66.71 2.73 59.37 2.67 65.59 2.69

capturing scene evolution. Notably, the gap with the static baseline highlights that a large portion of scene dynamics cannot be explained by persistence alone, but requires modeling how objects and relations change under actions. At the same time, the improvement over the Qwen-based baseline suggests that operating in a structured graph space provides a stronger inductive bias than purely language-driven predictions. Overall, these results validate our formulation of scene evolution as a sequence of activity-conditioned graph transformations, enabling more accurate and interpretable predictions of future scene structure. 

5.5 Long Horizon Reasoning on EXPLORE-Bench 

We evaluate the generalization capabilities of our activity-conditioned graph edit forecasting frame-work on EXPLORE-Bench [ 15 ], a benchmark designed to assess long-horizon reasoning over sequences of actions. The task requires predicting the final scene resulting from the sequential application of atomic actions to an initial state. We cast this problem within our framework by first extracting a scene graph from the initial scene (Sec. 3.1), and conditioning GLEN on the sequence of actions to predict the resulting scene graph, which serves as a structured representation of the final state. Notably, we do not train our model on this benchmark. Instead, we directly apply the model trained on A-GEF, demonstrating its ability to transfer to long-horizon reasoning without any task-specific supervision. This is particularly significant because such long-horizon compositional reasoning tasks are typically addressed using MLLMs only. In contrast, we show that a structured, graph-based formulation alone is sufficient to model long multi-step scene evolution under actions. We follow the evaluation protocol of [ 15 ], measuring both object and relation level accuracy. For object evaluation, Sentence-BERT embeddings are used to compute a similarity matrix between predicted and ground-truth objects, yielding a soft coverage score Sobj . For relations, a standardized prompting strategy is used to guide a large language model in scoring predicted relations on a 0–5 scale against ground-truth annotations, resulting in the Srel metric. As shown in Table. 4, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on Sobj and competitive results on Srel compared to MLLMs baselines. These results highlight the strong generalization ability of our structured, activity-conditioned formulation for modeling long-horizon scene evolution, and demonstrate that graph-based reasoning provides a viable alternative to purely language-based approaches for compo-sitional temporal understanding. 

## 6 Future directions 

Our formulation models evolving scenes as editable graphs, enabling explicit reasoning over how actions transform the state of the environment. While this is valuable for human activity understanding, a particularly promising direction lies in embodied-AI and especially robotics. By extending GLEN with spatial prediction, it naturally becomes a structured scene transition model particularly suited to let a robotic agent reason not only about what changes, but also about where such changes occur and 

why . This provides a direct bridge between perception and action, supporting grounded planning and control through explicit predictions of future scene states, and may also serve as rich intermediate representation for visual policy learning trained from graph-based expert demonstrations. 97 Conclusion 

We introduce a new paradigm for egocentric video understanding by modeling scenes as structured graphs and their evolution as activity-conditioned graph edits. This enables explicit reasoning over how actions transform the environment, unifying representation learning, language alignment, and temporal prediction within a single framework. Our results show that operating in structured space improves language grounding and temporal reasoning, while providing interpretability and controllability. More broadly, this work highlights editable, structured representations as a promising foundation bridging perception and action. 

## Acknowledgments 

This study was carried out within the FAIR - Future Artificial Intelligence Research and received funding from the European Union Next-GenerationEU (PIANO NAZIONALE DI RIPRESA E RESILIENZA (PNRR) – MISSIONE 4 COMPONENTE 2, INVESTIMENTO 1.3 – D.D. 1555 11/10/2022, PE00000013). This manuscript reflects only the authors’ views and opinions, neither the European Union nor the European Commission can be considered responsible for them. We acknowledge the CINECA award under the ISCRA initiative, for the availability of high performance computing resources and support. 

## References 

[1] Abrar Anwar, John Welsh, Joydeep Biswas, Soha Pouya, and Yan Chang. Remembr: Building and reasoning over long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot navigation. In ICRA , 2025. [2] Yue Fan, Xiaojian Ma, Rongpeng Su, Jun Guo, Rujie Wu, Xi Chen, and Qing Li. Embodied videoagent: Persistent memory from egocentric videos and embodied sensors enables dynamic scene understanding. In 

ICCV , 2025. [3] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In CVPR , 2022. [4] Baoxiong Jia, Ting Lei, Song-Chun Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Egotaskqa: Understanding human tasks in egocentric videos. In NeurIPS , 2022. [5] Kevin Qinghong Lin, Jinpeng Wang, Mattia Soldan, Michael Wray, Rui Yan, Eric Z XU, Difei Gao, Rong-Cheng Tu, Wenzhe Zhao, Weijie Kong, et al. Egocentric video-language pretraining. In NIPS , 2022. [6] Shraman Pramanick, Yale Song, Sayan Nag, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Hardik Shah, Mike Zheng Shou, Rama Chellappa, and Pengchuan Zhang. Egovlpv2: Egocentric video-language pre-training with fusion in the backbone. In ICCV , 2023. [7] Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jitendra Malik. Egoschema: A diagnostic benchmark for very long-form video language understanding. In NeurIPS , 2023. [8] Jingwei Ji, Ranjay Krishna, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Action genome: Actions as compositions of spatio-temporal scene graphs. In CVPR , 2020. [9] Yuren Cong, Wentong Liao, Hanno Ackermann, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Michael Ying Yang. Spatial-temporal transformer for dynamic scene graph generation. In ICCV , 2021. [10] Jingkang Yang, Wenxuan Peng, Xiangtai Li, Zujin Guo, Liangyu Chen, Bo Li, Zheng Ma, Kaiyang Zhou, Wayne Zhang, Chen Change Loy, et al. Panoptic video scene graph generation. In CVPR , 2023. [11] Trong-Thuan Nguyen, Pha Nguyen, Jackson Cothren, Alper Yilmaz, and Khoa Luu. Hyperglm: Hypergraph for video scene graph generation and anticipation. In CVPR , 2025. [12] Rohith Peddi, Saksham Singh, Saurabh, Parag Singla, and Vibhav Gogate. Towards scene graph anticipation. In ECCV , 2024. [13] Antonio Alliegro, Francesca Pistilli, Tatiana Tommasi, and Giuseppe Averta. Forescene: Forecasting human activity via latent scene graphs diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06182 , 2025. 

10 [14] Thomas Hummel, Shyamgopal Karthik, Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu, and Zeynep Akata. Egocvr: An egocentric benchmark for fine-grained composed video retrieval. In ECCV , 2024. [15] Chengjun Yu, Xuhan Zhu, Chaoqun Du, Pengfei Yu, Wei Zhai, Yang Cao, and Zheng-Jun Zha. Explore-bench: Egocentric scene prediction with long-horizon reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09731 ,2026. [16] Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He. Sgtr: End-to-end scene graph generation with transformer. In CVPR , 2022. [17] Jinbae Im, JeongYeon Nam, Nokyung Park, Hyungmin Lee, and Seunghyun Park. Egtr: Extracting graph from transformer for scene graph generation. In CVPR , 2024. [18] Zhanwen Chen, Saed Rezayi, and Sheng Li. More knowledge, less bias: Unbiasing scene graph generation with explicit ontological adjustment. In WACV , 2023. [19] Jae Sung Park, Zixian Ma, Linjie Li, Chenhao Zheng, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Ximing Lu, Khyathi Chandu, Quan Kong, Norimasa Kobori, Ali Farhadi, et al. Synthetic visual genome. In CVPR , 2025. [20] Ziqi Gao, Jieyu Zhang, Wisdom Oluchi Ikezogwo, Jae Sung Park, Tario G You, Daniel Ogbu, Chenhao Zheng, Weikai Huang, Yinuo Yang, Winson Han, et al. Synthetic visual genome 2: Extracting large-scale spatio-temporal scene graphs from videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23543 , 2026. [21] Kibum Kim, Kanghoon Yoon, Jaehyeong Jeon, Yeonjun In, Jinyoung Moon, Donghyun Kim, and Chany-oung Park. Llm4sgg: Large language models for weakly supervised scene graph generation. In CVPR ,2024. [22] Sayak Nag, Kyle Min, Subarna Tripathi, and Amit K Roy-Chowdhury. Unbiased scene graph generation in videos. In CVPR , 2023. [23] Trong-Thuan Nguyen, Pha Nguyen, and Khoa Luu. Hig: Hierarchical interlacement graph approach to scene graph generation in video understanding. In CVPR , 2024. [24] Jianguo Mao, Wenbin Jiang, Xiangdong Wang, Zhifan Feng, Yajuan Lyu, Hong Liu, and Yong Zhu. Dynamic multistep reasoning based on video scene graph for video question answering. In HLT-NAACL ,2022. [25] Ivan Rodin, Antonino Furnari, Kyle Min, Subarna Tripathi, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. Action scene graphs for long-form understanding of egocentric videos. In CVPR , 2024. [26] Haiyi Qiu, Minghe Gao, Long Qian, Kaihang Pan, Qifan Yu, Juncheng Li, Wenjie Wang, Siliang Tang, Yueting Zhuang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Step: Enhancing video-llms’ compositional reasoning by spatio-temporal graph-guided self-training. In CVPR , 2025. [27] Linlin Zong, Xinyu Zhai, Xinyue Liu, Wenxin Liang, Xianchao Zhang, and Bo Xu. Structuring video semantics with temporal triplets for zero-shot video question answering. In CIKM , 2025. [28] Sergey Linok, Vadim Semenov, Anastasia Trunova, Oleg Bulichev, and Dmitry Yudin. Dygenc: Encoding a sequence of textual scene graphs to reason and answer questions in dynamic scenes. Technologies , 2026. [29] Tatiana Zemskova, Solomon Andryushenko, Ilya Obrubov, Viktoriia Khoruzhaia, Ekaterina Eroshenko, Ekaterina Derevyanka, and Dmitry Yudin. Focusgraph: Graph-structured frame selection for embodied long video question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04349 , 2026. [30] Alberto Sanfeliu and King-Sun Fu. A distance measure between attributed relational graphs for pattern recognition. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , 1983. [31] Michel Neuhaus, Kaspar Riesen, and Horst Bunke. Fast suboptimal algorithms for the computation of graph edit distance. In Joint IAPR International Workshops on Statistical Techniques in Pattern Recognition (SPR) and Structural and Syntactic Pattern Recognition (SSPR) , 2006. [32] Kaspar Riesen, Stefan Fankhauser, and Horst Bunke. Speeding up graph edit distance computation with a bipartite heuristic. In MLG , 2007. [33] Kaspar Riesen and Horst Bunke. Approximate graph edit distance computation by means of bipartite graph matching. Image and Vision computing , 2009. [34] Francesc Serratosa. Fast computation of bipartite graph matching. Pattern Recognition Letters , 2014. 

11 [35] Yunsheng Bai, Hao Ding, Song Bian, Ting Chen, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Simgnn: A neural network approach to fast graph similarity computation. In Proceedings of the twelfth ACM international conference on web search and data mining , 2019. [36] Yujia Li, Chenjie Gu, Thomas Dullien, Oriol Vinyals, and Pushmeet Kohli. Graph matching networks for learning the similarity of graph structured objects. In ICML , 2019. [37] Benjamin Paassen, Daniele Grattarola, Daniele Zambon, Cesare Alippi, and Barbara Hammer. Graph edit networks. In ICLR , 2021. [38] Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, 2026. URL https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5 .[39] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In ECCV , 2024. [40] Sanghyeok Chu, Seonguk Seo, and Bohyung Han. Fine-grained captioning of long videos through scene graph consolidation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16427 , 2025. [41] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollar, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. SAM 2: Segment anything in images and videos. In ICLR , 2025. [42] Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel HAZIZA, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. [43] Johanna Wald, Helisa Dhamo, Nassir Navab, and Federico Tombari. Learning 3D Semantic Scene Graphs from 3D Indoor Reconstructions. In CVPR , 2020. [44] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML , 2023. [45] Omkar Thawakar, Muzammal Naseer, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Salman Khan, Michael Felsberg, Mubarak Shah, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Composed video retrieval via enriched context and discriminative embeddings. In CVPR , 2024. [46] Daniel Bolya, Po-Yao Huang, Peize Sun, Jang Hyun Cho, Andrea Madotto, Chen Wei, Tengyu Ma, Jiale Zhi, Jathushan Rajasegaran, Hanoona Abdul Rasheed, Junke Wang, Marco Monteiro, Hu Xu, Shiyu Dong, Nikhila Ravi, Shang-Wen Li, Piotr Dollar, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Perception encoder: The best visual embeddings are not at the output of the network. In NIPS , 2025. [47] Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Minilmv2: Multi-head self-attention relation distillation for compressing pretrained transformers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , 2021. [48] Baoqi Pei, Yifei Huang, Jilan Xu, Yuping He, Guo Chen, Fei Wu, Yu Qiao, and Jiangmiao Pang. Egothinker: Unveiling egocentric reasoning with spatio-temporal cot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23569 , 2025. [49] Kumar Ashutosh, Rohit Girdhar, Lorenzo Torresani, and Kristen Grauman. Hiervl: Learning hierarchical video-language embeddings. In CVPR , 2023. [50] Simone Alberto Peirone, Francesca Pistilli, and Giuseppe Averta. Hiero: understanding the hierarchy of human behavior enhances reasoning on egocentric videos. In ICCV , 2025. [51] Lucas Ventura, Antoine Yang, Cordelia Schmid, and Gül Varol. CoVR: Learning composed video retrieval from web video captions. In AAAI , 2024. [52] Shyamgopal Karthik, Karsten Roth, Massimiliano Mancini, and Zeynep Akata. Vision-by-language for training-free compositional image retrieval. In ICLR , 2024. [53] Omkar Thawakar, Dmitry Demidov, Ritesh Thawkar, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Mubarak Shah, Fahad Shah-baz Khan, and Salman Khan. Beyond simple edits: Composed video retrieval with dense modifications. In 

ICCV , 2025. 

12 Appendix A The SG-Ego dataset 

SG-Ego Examples. We show some examples from our dataset in Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 5, reporting the spatial scene graph at the start of the action ( Gt), the textual narration describing the human action and the final consolidated spatio-temporal scene graph over the entire temporal window Gt:t+T .

SG-Ego-Align. The Align dataset approx. 3.8M spatio-temporal graphs from 7297 unique videos. Each video is paired with its corresponding textual narration from Ego4D. We leverage the EgoClip [ 5]annotations to define a temporal window around each annotated action. These graphs have 10 .97 ±

6.58 nodes and 16 .06 ± 12 .24 edges on average. 

SG-Ego-Edit. The Edit dataset consists of 360k training and 7.2k validation samples. Samples are taken from 6537 and 181 unique videos for the train and validation splits, respectively. In the train split , the start graphs have 5.10 ± 3.36 nodes and 4.05 ± 3.24 edges on average. The spatio-temporal graphs consolidated over the entire window have 11 .71 ± 6.62 nodes and 17 .34 ± 12 .34 edges on average. In the validation split , the start graphs have 5.10 ± 3.36 nodes and 4.05 ± 3.24 edges on average. The spatio-temporal graphs consolidated over the entire window have 12 .32 ± 7.18 nodes and 20 .35 ± 15 .45 edges on average. 

Object and relation vocabularies. We define a closed set vocabulary of node and edge labels. Specifically, we mine node labels from the Ego4D nouns taxonomy and remove synonyms by clustering the corresponding text embeddings. Similarly, relations are taken from the Ego4D verbs taxonomy and from the relations labels of PVSG [ 10 ]. Following this process, we obtain a set of 

Nobj = 1480 objects and Nrel = 387 relations. We report node and edges distributions in Figure 6. Note that we label the node relative to the camera wearer, i.e., the human recording the video and performing the main actions, as the "main actor", in order to differentiate it with other possible people in the scene, labeled as "person". 

Figure 3: Qualitative examples from the SG-Ego dataset . Video UID: 

a1b43a0c-cfaa-44df-adcc-531697ce1f8c , from second 70.4 to 71.6. Notice that in 

Gt+T , multiple crochet hook nodes appear because the graph tracks the main actor while knitting, and the crochet hook bounding box changes significantly over time as the action progresses. 13 Figure 4: Qualitative examples from the SG-Ego dataset . Video UID: 

727ffce8-20ec-4111-af26-698eb306e8c7 , from second 74.6 to 75. Interestingly, by ag-gregating information across the temporal action window, Gt:t+T captures a richer representation of the scene than the frame-level graph Gt. For example, the two knife nodes correspond to distinct knives both present in the environment but not captured in a single frame-level observation. 

Figure 5: Qualitative examples from the SG-Ego dataset . Video UID: 

31d6fe77-da70-42da-8f47-66bb79b9285b , from second 89.8 to 90.8. Notice that the temporal aggregation in Gt:t+T enriches the scene representation by incorporating objects and relations observed at different moments of the action sequence. While the initial graph Gt only captures a limited subset of the environment, the consolidated spatio-temporal graph reveals additional objects ( e.g., bowls, garlic and plant) together with evolving interactions involving the main actor. 14 main actor 

> person
> table
> cup
> bowl
> bottle
> floor
> chair
> plate
> phone
> bag
> card
> container
> knife
> box
> paper
> book
> paint brush
> ground
> cloth
> hand
> wall
> spoon
> counter
> jar 0
> 200k
> Most common node labels on
> hold
> touch
> sit on
> in
> stand on
> next to
> above
> stand
> wear
> in front of
> sit
> support
> rearrange
> connect
> cover
> lie on
> cut
> attach
> put on
> look at
> beneath
> see
> position
> press 0
> 1000k
> 2000k
> Most common relation labels

Figure 6: Node and edge label distribution in SG-Ego-Edit. We define a vocabulary of object relation labels by mining the Ego4D taxonomy and the PVSG relation labels. Following this process, we obtain a set of Nobj = 1480 objects and Nrel = 387 relations. 

A.1 Annotation Pipeline 

For frame-level triplets extraction, we use Qwen3.5-9B [ 38 ]. We prompt the model with one frame at the time, disable thinking and set the generation temperature to t = 0 .7. We report the full prompt used to extract the frame-level triplets in the box "Triplets extraction prompt". Triplets extraction prompt You are an expert in human-object and object-object interaction analysis. You are given an image corresponding to a frame coming from an egocentric video and your final goal is to generate a good description of the interactions in the image. Output the relations as a list of triplets "subject, predicate, object", one per line. Indications YOU MUST FOLLOW: - Strictly follow the output format required and only include human-object or object-object interactions. For example, do not output "(wall, white)" because it’s not an object-object interaction. - Be exhaustive about all the spatial and functional interactions in the scene. - Be specific in the relation types and avoid vague predicates like ’is’, ’has’ or ’near’. - Refer to the human wearing the egocentric camera as "camera_wearer", and use "human_x" for any other people in the scene. - DO NOT repeat the same triplet more than once. - DO NOT include attributes about the objects, such as their color, size, or other visual details. Focus only on the interactions between them. - Include spatial relations between human and objects and between objects (such as "cup_1, on, table_1"). - Include functional relations only between the human and the objects in the scene (such as "human_1, holding, cup_2"). - DO NOT include functional relations between objects in the scene (such as "cup_1, used for, 15 drinking"). Use only spatial relations for object-object interactions. - Keep track of multiple instances of the same object category in the scene using numerical indices (e.g., "cup_1", "cup_2") and use these indices consistently across all triplets to refer to the same instance. - For objects that are not involved in any interaction, do not describe them. - DO NOT describe what the human is wearing. 

## B GLEN Ablations and extended results 

B.1 Graph-Text Alignment 

Table 5: Ablations on EgoMCQ. We compare different configurations of GLEN using the Graph-Text Alignment ( GTA ) and Graph-Text Matching ( GTM ) objectives. For prediction, we can use either the GTA head (trained with the contrastive objective), the GTM head (trained for graph-text matching) or an ensemble of the two heads. We indicate with n the number of negative samples for each anchor in the batch.                               

> Configuration EgoMCQ Inter EgoMCQ Intra
> GTCA ( n= 1 )89.3 53.2 GTCA ( n= 3 )90.6 53.9 GTCA ( n= 1 ) + GTM 89.6 53.3 GTCA ( n= 3 ) + GTM 91.0 54.4 GTCA ( n= 1 ) + GTM †89.4 53.7 GTCA ( n= 3 ) + GTM †91.0 54.9 Mode EgoMCQ Inter EgoMCQ Intra
> GTCA head 91.0 54.9 GTM †head 80.8 54.0 GTCA + GTM †heads 91.2 56.2

We report in Table 5 (left) the impact of different training objectives for the Graph-Text Alignment task on EgoMCQ. Here, n denotes the number of negatives sampled for each anchor within the batch. We observe that hard negative mining significantly improves graph-text alignment performance. Since scene graphs provide a high-level abstraction of the evolving scene, this strategy encourages the model to distinguish between actions occurring in visually similar scenes while capturing different underlying actions. The GTM objective further helps the model better distinguish between similar scene graphs. The GTM † variant further restricts sampling to the same video. For the evaluation in Table 5 (right), we use either the cross-modal similarity between the graph and text embeddings (GTA head), the output of the GTM head or a combination of the two. 

B.2 Action-conditioned graph edit forecasting 

We show in Table 6 the impact of the number of node queries on the A-GEF task. Increasing the number of queries allows the model to specialize each query on different objects which is particularly helpful on the large consolidated graphs from SG-Ego-Edit. 

B.3 Long-Horizon Reasoning on EXPLORE-Bench 

We present the full results for Explore-Bench in Table 7. Table 6: Action-conditioned graph edit forecasting (A-GEF) on SG-Ego .                   

> Num queries Triplet Recall
> R@20 R@50 R@100
> Gt(static )23.17 23.17 23.17 64 34.98 42.19 44.73 72 35.12 42.84 45.89 100 35.05 43.71 47.84 128 35.06 43.92 48.49

16 Table 7: Evaluation results on EXPLORE-Bench. Short , Medium and Long mean the subsets with short (11-99), medium (100-199) and long (200-694) atomic-action sequences, respectively. 

Methods Short Medium Long Full 

Sobj Satt Srel Suni Sobj Satt Srel Suni Sobj Satt Srel Suni Sobj Satt Srel Suni 

Proprietary Multimodal Foundation Models (API) 

GPT-5.2-Chat 59.91 1.74 2.70 48.71 59.88 1.67 2.65 47.85 58.06 1.65 2.61 46.91 59.69 1.70 2.67 48.19 Gemini-3-Flash 60.31 1.84 2.78 50.27 59.33 1.76 2.71 48.84 58.27 1.72 2.69 48.18 59.72 1.80 2.75 49.51 Gemini-3-Pro 61.29 1.81 2.77 50.11 60.99 1.75 2.74 49.44 59.17 1.70 2.70 48.31 60.94 1.77 2.75 49.66 

Open-source Non-thinking Multimodal Foundation Models 

Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct 48.17 1.36 2.27 39.70 44.19 1.22 2.17 36.92 39.92 1.09 2.08 34.28 45.78 1.28 2.21 38.07 Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 47.64 1.34 2.23 39.14 46.04 1.27 2.16 37.73 43.79 1.22 2.15 36.73 46.62 1.30 2.20 38.35 Keye-VL-1.5-8B # 49.70 1.34 2.24 39.78 49.49 1.34 2.24 39.69 46.15 1.25 2.17 37.68 49.23 1.33 2.23 39.51 LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-4B 51.15 1.42 2.33 41.37 49.17 1.33 2.28 39.85 46.35 1.28 2.26 38.64 49.88 1.37 2.31 40.50 Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct 52.18 1.48 2.55 43.77 49.03 1.37 2.45 41.38 43.27 1.18 2.28 37.34 50.02 1.40 2.48 42.17 Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 52.80 1.52 2.46 43.58 51.25 1.46 2.41 42.32 47.78 1.34 2.36 40.22 51.67 1.48 2.43 42.74 LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B 53.25 1.54 2.51 44.13 51.21 1.47 2.44 42.63 47.62 1.38 2.41 40.83 51.87 1.49 2.47 43.21 Ovis2.5-2B # 55.65 1.60 2.56 45.64 51.70 1.44 2.43 42.49 47.96 1.33 2.35 40.13 53.33 1.51 2.49 43.86 InternVL3.5-2B 57.51 1.64 2.62 46.80 55.35 1.53 2.50 44.60 52.40 1.42 2.41 42.32 56.14 1.58 2.55 45.48 InternVL3.5-8B 57.85 1.65 2.62 47.00 55.77 1.56 2.55 45.30 53.30 1.51 2.51 43.99 56.57 1.60 2.58 46.04 MiMo-VL-7B-RL-2508 # 56.13 1.67 2.60 46.53 55.82 1.64 2.59 46.14 53.42 1.58 2.54 44.68 55.71 1.65 2.59 46.18 MiniCPM-V-4.5 (8B) # 58.86 1.70 2.63 47.67 57.45 1.64 2.58 46.49 54.69 1.56 2.55 44.95 57.87 1.66 2.60 46.93 Ovis2.5-9B # 59.51 1.74 2.72 48.85 57.84 1.65 2.63 47.01 53.83 1.55 2.50 44.32 58.26 1.68 2.66 47.66 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct 61.34 1.88 2.84 51.23 60.78 1.85 2.81 50.64 56.83 1.73 2.71 48.00 60.63 1.85 2.82 50.65 

Open-source Thinking Multimodal Foundation Models 

Ovis2.5-2B ∗ 51.10 1.40 2.43 42.02 44.52 1.17 2.20 36.89 40.70 1.04 2.10 34.25 47.50 1.28 2.31 39.25 Qwen3-VL-2B-Thinking 59.23 1.47 2.63 46.13 57.02 1.19 2.53 42.79 48.82 1.02 2.30 37.81 57.26 1.32 2.56 43.97 Ovis2.5-9B ∗ 55.92 1.61 2.59 45.95 53.79 1.51 2.50 44.03 49.71 1.39 2.41 41.48 54.44 1.55 2.54 44.74 Keye-VL-1.5-8B ∗ 56.58 1.58 2.55 45.64 56.54 1.54 2.53 45.14 53.13 1.62 2.43 44.09 56.18 1.57 2.53 45.28 MiMo-VL-7B-RL-2508 ∗ 57.32 1.64 2.56 46.26 56.85 1.59 2.53 45.63 56.58 1.57 2.50 45.17 57.06 1.61 2.54 45.90 MiniCPM-V-4.5 (8B) ∗ 58.87 1.74 2.67 48.25 57.79 1.69 2.63 47.33 54.16 1.54 2.52 44.46 57.95 1.70 2.64 47.49 GLM-4.6V-Flash (9B) 60.70 1.78 2.71 49.32 58.44 1.70 2.65 47.67 54.95 1.60 2.60 45.75 59.22 1.73 2.67 48.31 Step3-VL-10B 61.32 1.76 2.78 49.87 60.06 1.62 2.71 48.01 59.11 1.60 2.64 47.09 60.61 1.69 2.74 48.87 Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking 63.77 1.91 2.85 52.08 62.61 1.81 2.78 50.56 58.02 1.64 2.63 47.07 62.70 1.84 2.80 50.96 

Embodied/Egocentric Multimodal Models 

Embodied-Reasoner (7B) 39.74 1.00 1.96 32.65 39.69 0.99 1.96 32.56 37.22 0.97 2.02 32.23 39.44 1.00 1.97 32.57 EgoThinker (7B) 48.22 1.36 2.23 39.39 45.88 1.28 2.19 37.89 42.42 1.16 2.08 35.36 46.71 1.31 2.20 38.38 

Graph Edits 

GLEN 66.12 - 2.67 - 66.71 - 2.73 - 59.37 - 2.67 - 65.59 - 2.69 -17