Title: Answer Set Programming Energised! End-to-End Neurosymbolic Reasoning and Learning with ASP and Energy Based Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.08136v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 00:40:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Answer Set Programming Energised! 

# End-to-End Neurosymbolic Reasoning and Learning with ASP and Energy Based Models 

Jakob Suchan 1,3, Julius Monsen 2,3, Salim Baloch 1,3, and Mehul Bhatt 2,3 

> 1

Constructor University Bremen, Bremen, Germany 

jsuchan@constructor.university  

> 2

Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden 

info@codesign-lab.org  

> 3

CoDesign Lab > Cognitive Vision codesign-lab.org/cognitive-vision 

Abstract. We present a general neurosymbolic reasoning and learning methodology based on a modular integration of answer set programming 

with an energy based model substrate. Key contributions are: (1) sup-porting joint optimisation in the continuous latent space through explicit ASP-based declarative semantics fully incorporating background knowl-edge, constraints, non-monotonic inference; and (2) advancing recent works at the interface of answer sets, probabilistic logic, and answer set modulo theories by providing a generalised model and practical platform for ASP-centric robust, end-to-end training for applications in dynamic domains (e.g., involving perception and interaction). We provide a prac-tical implementation, and demonstrate basic use and application (with MNIST), and evaluate with the visual question-answering benchmark Clevr and the multi-object tracking benchmark MOT. 

# 1 Motivation 

The integration of machine learning and reasoning remains a challenge and an area of high interest in AI research [9]. Addressing this is particularly needed for real-world problems –e.g., in embodied perception, control, decision-making– in-volving interactive dynamics, uncertainty & partial observability, abnormalities etc [3,22]. Towards this, the broader purpose of this research is on high-level, semantically-guided learning of high-dimensional sensory structure keeping in mind trustworthy design. i.e., explainability, interpretability, formal verification– aimed at ethico-legal compliance vis-a-vis emerging AI regulation [1,8,18]. The main scientific aim is to advance systematic, robust methodological developments aimed at integrating the declaratively modelled semantic structure of problem spaces with quantitative optimisation and learning. 

Declarative Neurosymbolism, End-to-End . Neurosymbolic integrations from the viewpoint of KR and ML research have gained traction in recent years. Particularly relevant to the scope addressed here are declarative methodology arXiv:2607.08136v1 [cs.AI] 9 Jul 2026 2 Suchan et al. 

centric integrations involving stable model semantics rooted Answer Set Pro-gramming (ASP) [4], and ASP derivatives such as specialised Answer Set Modulo Theories (ASPMT) [2,26] and Probabilistic ASP [15]. Most recently, an active line of work building upon such fundamental perspectives pertains integration of KR/ASP and (deep learning driven) computer vision aimed at realising neu-rosymbolic visual commonsense [22,21,24,27,25,6,19]. Here, the use of logic and answer set programming stands out as a sustained line of inquiry from viewpoints such as (semantic) visual-question answering [21,6,19], and non-monotonic visual abduction for (neurosymbolic) spatio-temporal belief maintenance in dynamic domains [25], and “in-the-wild” neurosymbolic reasoning about embodied inter-action [23]. Differences in the technical framing and supported computational capabilities in these works notwithstanding, the general underlying motivation remains unified: integrating neurally-driven visual processing capabilities (to ex-tract geometric scene elements and visual features from imagery) with high-level, expressive conceptual commonsense knowledge with the aim to support neurosymbolic interpretation of either static and/or dynamic stimuli. With these methodologies, a caveat is that they preserve a conceptual and com-putational separation between symbolic inference and subsymbolic learning: neu-ral outputs are injected into a logical program, reasoning is performed over dis-crete abstractions, and learning is driven primarily by task-level losses instead of the full declarative semantics of the reasoning mechanism (i.e., full expres-sivity afforded by a non-monotonic framework such as ASP). This separation becomes a fundamental limitation in non-trivial, real-world dynamic domains, e.g., in problems such as real-time vision where truly integrated reasoning and learning requires the joint resolution of aspects such as perceptual uncertainty, dynamic spatial-temporal consistency, and non-monotonic commonsense reason-ing for belief revision over extended time horizons. For truly integrated end-to-end reasoning and learning , the inference mechanism cannot merely be a filtering or validation step, but should be an integral part of the learning process itself. What is needed, therefore, is a neurosymbolic framework where symbolic seman-tics, optimisation, and learning operate as modular yet tightly integrated and mutually influencing computational substrates. 

ASPEn – ASP Energised ! We propose a general, declarative neurosym-bolic reasoning and learning methodology based on an integration of ASP with Energy-Based Models (EBM). The core operational mechanism involves inter-preting ASP-based world models as structured embeddings in a continuous op-timisation landscape. In this setting, ASP-based stable models are no longer treated as isolated symbolic artefacts, but function as preferred configurations in a joint discrete–continuous space, obtained through semantically-guided energy minimisation. Previous ASP and logic programming based neurosymbolic meth-ods involving weighted rule satisfaction, probabilistic choice over stable models, constraint consistency in answer set modulo theories, and likelihood-based neu-ral predictions all induce preferences over interpretations. Our approach, essen-tially a generalisation with an energy-based formulation, makes this preference structure explicit and operational; i.e., logical constraints, defaults, abductive ex-ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 3

planations, as well as specialised domains for aspects such as space and motion directly shape the energy landscape over candidate world models . Importantly, this formulation supports bidirectional interaction, e.g., non-monotonic reason-ing not only constrains inference, but also generates structured learning signals that influence the optimisation of the low-level energy landscape itself. In our approach, ASP’s native optimisation constructs enable preference-based selec-tion among competing interpretations, a capability that aligns naturally with energy minimisation. We demonstrate the proposed method through a prac-tical implementation and its empirical evaluation spanning both controlled as well as complex dynamic settings. Addressing community benchmarks, we also perform problem-domain specific evaluation focussing on compositional visual reasoning ( static case ; CLEVR [12]), and multi-object tracking ( dynamic case ;

> MOT

) involving (commonsense) neurosymbolic reasoning and learning about space and motion. These experiments illustrate that the proposed methodology scales beyond MNIST [14] examples, supports rich declarative modelling, and yields robust performance (under real-world challenges such as noise, ambiguity, partial observability). 

# 2 Foundational Preliminaries 

We present the necessary foundational preliminaries relevant to declarative non-monotonic reasoning and low-level optimisation and learning involving Answer Set Programming and Energy Based Models respectively: 

2.1 Answer Set Programming (ASP) 

Answer Set Programming is an established and widely applied foundational declarative language and robust computing methodology for a range of (non-monotonic) knowledge representation and reasoning tasks [20,10,11,4,16]. Rooted in the stable model semantics of logic programs, reasoning in ASP is equivalent to model-theoretic derivation and selection/optimisation of interpre-tations, i.e., stable models or answer sets, under non-monotonic assumptions and support for defaults, exceptions, indirect effects, preferences. In essence, ASP supports declarative selection among alternative models via minimisation and optimisation, making it particularly suited to diverse forms of commonsense reasoning, e.g., abductive explanation in the presence of incomplete information [25]. 

Basic ASP Semantics . An answer set program is a finite set of rules of the form h ← b1, . . . , b m, not c1, . . . , not cn, where h, bi, and cj are (possibly strongly negated) atoms, and not denotes default negation . Intuitively, the rule states that h is derivable if all positive body literals bi hold and none of the negative literals cj can be derived. Let Π be a ground ASP program and I an interpretation. The Gelfond–Lifschitz reduct of Π with respect to I is obtained by: (1) discarding every rule r ∈ Π4 Suchan et al. 

whose body contains a default-negated literal not c with c ∈ I; and (2) removing all remaining default-negated literals from rule bodies. The resulting program ΠI is a positive (negation-free) logic program. An inter-pretation I is a stable model or an answer set) of Π if I is a minimal model 

(under set inclusion) of the reduct of Π with respect to I. We denote a stable model of an ASP program as SM [Π]. Stable models constitute self-supporting interpretations that satisfy all rules under a non-monotonic reading. It is im-portant to note that in this setting, reasoning is model-selective rather than proof-oriented, and that multiple stable models may exist, each corresponding to a distinct, coherent world model. 

2.2 Energy-Based Model (EBM) 

Energy-Based Models (EBMs) formulate learning and inference as optimisation over a scalar-valued energy function that scores the compatibility of structured configurations [13]. An EBM is defined by an energy function Eθ (x) : X → R,where X denotes the space of possible configurations (e.g., data, latent vari-ables, or structured hypotheses), and θ denotes a set of learnable parameters. Lower energy values correspond to more compatible or preferred configurations. Optimisation in EBM is formulated as: x∗ = arg min x∈X Eθ (x), selecting config-urations that best satisfy learned and imposed constraints. Unlike probabilistic models, EBMs do not require normalised probability distributions; relative en-ergy differences suffice to define preferences among configurations. Learning in EBMs proceeds by shaping the energy landscape so that observed or desired configurations attain lower energy than implausible ones. Given a set of target configurations D, training typically minimises a loss of the form 

L(θ) = Eθ (x+) − Eθ (x−), where x+ denotes data-consistent (positive) configu-rations and x− denotes negative or contrastive configurations obtained via sam-pling or optimisation. This contrastive formulation supports weak supervision, partial observability, and structured prediction. The energy function is often de-composed additively: Eθ (x, y ) = P 

> i

Eθi (x, y ), where each term corresponds to a constraint, interaction, or preference. This supports modular integration of heterogeneous knowledge sources. A key characteristic of EBMs is that these represent learning and reasoning en-tirely in terms of compatibility constraints over configurations, subsuming gen-erative and discriminative models as special cases while avoiding commitment to explicit likelihoods or fixed input–output mappings [13]. Multiple, heteroge-neous constraints –e.g., originating from perception or domain knowledge– can be combined additively as energy terms, enabling joint optimisation over mod-ularly integrated hybrid configurations. EBMs are therefore particularly suited for settings that require integration of continuous representations with symbolic or relational structure in the manner pursued in this research. ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 5fθ(x,a) 

Eθ(x) 

x   

> INFERENCE
> ASP Program
> M+M
> Grounding
> F+F-
> Solving
> Ground Program
> Loss
> The sets of constraint and
> unconstraint models
> Ground program
> including energised
> ground atoms
> Backpropagation
> Possible Models ( M)
> LEARNING
> M*
> Supervision Constraints ( C)
> Update θ

Fig. 1: ASPEn : End-to-End Inference and Learning Architecture 

# 3 ASP Energised! Formal Framework and Implementation 

ASPEn is a novel methodology integrating answer set programming and energy-based models for declarative neurosymbolic reasoning and learning in a manner that is end-to-end, and designed for challenging dynamic domains. Building upon recent and emerging works in neurosymbolic ASP (Sec 2, 5), we offer a general community-wide platform for a unified pursuit of research, development, evalua-tion and benchmarking of efforts in ASP-centric initiatives aimed at integrating KR and ML. 

3.1 Syntax and Semantics of ASPEn 

An ASPEn program Π is composed of a classical ASP program ΠASP and a set of energised atoms ΠEn , i.e., Π ≡def ΠASP ∪ ΠEn . Again, SM [Π]denotes the set of stable models (Sec 2.1) of Π. Below we primarily focus on succinctly and pragmatically highlighting the modelling of ΠEn component while assuming basic familiarity with declarative modelling of ASP programs wrt. the preliminaries in Sec 2.1. 

ASPEn Syntax focussing on ΠEn . Energies are obtained from Energy Based Models (EBMs) referenced by specific energy atoms:  

> energise(rule_name([Args])) :- B.

Here, the energise predicate couples an ASP rule rule _name ([ Args ]) with an energy function implemented as EBM (Sec 2.2). An EBM take n tensors as input, specified by the arguments ( Args ) in the energising rule, and outputs the corresponding energy E. To put this into perspective, consider a minimal working example: 6 Suchan et al. 

Example 1. Digit-value assignment in MNIST .Consider a minimal ASP program that assigns a numeric value (0 - 9) to an image of a handwritten digit, as it is for instance part of the ‘Addition’ task within the MNIST dataset (Sec. 4.1). Such digit assignment may be modelled by the following choice rule: 

> img(img). digit_value(0..9). 1{digit(X,V) : digit_value(V)}1 :- img(X).

To energize the digit assignment in ASPEn, we can then introduce the following energy term: 

> energise(digit(X,V)) :- digit(X,V).

This term couples the atom digit (X, V ) with an energy obtained from an energy function implemented as an EBM that takes the arguments of the atom, i.e., the image and a value, as input and assigns an energy to it. Finding the best assignment of an image to a numeric value is then based on minimising the energy digit-value pair with respect to this assigned energy. Building on the basic setup of Example 1, consider now the case of the CLEVR dataset [12], which consists of synthetic visual stimuli with abstract geometric entities and corresponding questions: 

Example 2. Compositional visual question-answering with CLEVR .Similar to the energisation of digit-value assignment in the MNIST task of Ex-ample 1, we may now energise multiple atoms representing object properties (e.g., size , and material ) in the CLEVR dataset as follows: 

> energise(size(O, C)) :- ... . energise(material(O, C)) :- ... .

These energised rules may then be used in the ASPEn program to infer object properties and relations, by assigning one property per category to each object and define reasoning rules over them: 

> 1{size(O,Z):size(Z)}1 :- ... . 1{material(O,M):material(M)}1 :- ... . exists(obj(O)) :- obj(O), size(O,large), material(O,metal).

The ancillary exists (obj (O)) rule here denotes that there is an object in the scene, and that it has a large size and is made of metal. ASPEn solving in this case finds the object properties minimising both the energies, i.e., the size and the material energy. 

Energy-Based Semantics over Stable Models. We introduce a distin-guished predicate energy (f, a), where f is a function symbol identifying an en-ergy factor and a is an energized atom. Given a set of stable models SM [Π], for ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 7

any stable model M ∈ SM [Π], E(M ) denotes the set of active energy atoms a

as follows:          

> E(M) = {(f, a)|energy (f, a)∈M}

Each energy symbol f is associated with a parameterized real-valued function 

fθ : X ×D f → R, where X denotes an input space (e.g., images), Df is the domain of arguments of f , and θ are learnable parameters. Given an input x ∈ X , the energy of a stable model M is defined as the sum of its active energy factors:        

> Eθ(M|x) = X
> (f, a)∈E (M)
> fθ(x, a)

Learning and inference proceed directly on these energies: 

– Inference identifies preferred stable models by minimizing Eθ (M | x) over 

M ∈ SM [Π]. 

– Learning encourages correct models (satisfying logical constraints) to have lower energy than invalid or competing configurations, e.g., via a contrastive objective obtained from ASP solving. Under this formulation, logical constraints encoded in Π restrict the set of fea-sible configurations, while the parameterized energy factors fθ assign graded preferences among them. This yields a structured energy-based model in which symbolic reasoning and differentiable scoring are integrated to guide learning and inference directly over complex, constrained combinatorial spaces. 

3.2 Inference & Learning 

We implement inference and learning in a modular yet tightly integrated manner within ASPEn (Fig 1); practically, we build upon Clingo [11] based ASP solving and pyTorch based neural processing. 

Inference by Energy Minimisation. Given the ‘energisation’ mechanism defined (Sec 3.1), the full range of ASP-based inference mechanisms remain ap-plicable and available depending on on the level of expressivity required. For our present purposes, lets focus on the case of the built-in optimization func-tionality of the Clingo ASP solver, by extracting all possible energy terms from the ground program and inject energies computed from the corresponding en-ergy based model. Here, inference is formulated as exact maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference over stable models, i.e., given the energy Eθ (M | x) of a stable model M ∈ SM [Π], MAP corresponds to solving:        

> M∗= arg min
> M∈SM [Π]
> Eθ(M|x).

i.e., identifying the stable model with minimal total energy. From a practical perspective, inference is implemented in the following steps: 

Step 1. Grounding. The logic program Π is grounded using clingo, produc-ing a finite propositional program whose stable models correspond to feasible configurations under the symbolic constraints. 8 Suchan et al. 

Step 2. Energy Evaluation. For each ground energised atom energise (A),the corresponding neural energy function fθ (x, a) is evaluated externally and injected into the program as a numeric cost energy (A, E ).

Step 3. Cost-Based Optimization. MAP inference is implemented using Clingo’s built-in optimization mechanism, using the following minimization statement, which applies the energy E as a cost to the stable model Π if atom 

A is a member of the stable model:  

> #minimize { E : A, energy(A ,E) }

The total cost of the stable model is given by the sum of all applied costs, i.e. this optimization statement correspond to the additive energy Eθ (M | x).Complete optimization is performed over all stable models, such that the result-ing solution is the globally optimal stable model with respect to the injected energy values, and inference is exact with respect to the grounded program and the computed energy values. Logical rules in Π restrict the search space to feasi-ble stable models, while the energy terms rank these feasible configurations. As such, inference in ASPEn integrates symbolic reasoning and differentiable energy evaluation by compiling the energy-based semantics into weighted stable model optimization, enabling exact MAP reasoning over structured, constraint-driven hypothesis spaces. 

Contrastive Divergence based Learning. Learning of the energy functions is performed end-to-end using a contrastive free-energy objective. The central principle here is to assign lower energy to stable models that satisfy supervi-sion constraints, and comparatively higher energy to competing models. The contrastive loss compares two aggregated energy quantities over stable models: 

• Positive Free Energy ( F +). The positive phase aggregates the energies of all stable models that satisfy a set of logical supervision constraints C. Con-cretely, we consider the subset M + ∈ SM [Π] | M + satisfies C, obtained by aug-menting the program Π with the supervision constraints prior to solving. The positive free energy marginalizes over this subset via a log-sum-exp aggregation of model energies. This encourages stable models consistent with the supervision constraints to attain lower energy. 

• Negative Free Energy ( F −). The negative phase aggregates over all stable models M ∈ SM [Π], without enforcing supervision constraints. This represents the unconstrained free energy of the models and provides a reference, that is used to contrast stable models consistent with the supervision constraints against it. The learning objective is the difference between positive and negative free ener-gies. Minimizing this objective decreases the energy of stable models consistent with the supervision constraints relative to unconstrained stable models, i.e., 

L = F + − F −. Thus, contrastive divergence shapes the energy landscape de-fined by Eθ (M | x). Logical rules restrict the admissible hypothesis space, while gradient optimization adjusts the neural energy factors such that correct stable models emerge as energy minima within the constrained combinatorial space. ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 9

# 4 Applied Evaluation 

We perform problem-domain specific applied evaluation of the overall ASPEn methodology at two dinstinct levels: (1) the basic static case with the MNIST dataset [14] aimed at covering a minimal setup; and (2) a dynamic case involving multi-object tracking of moving objects in real-world settings with the MOT benchmark [5]. 

4.1 Base Case: “Addition with MNIST” 

We use the MNIST dataset [14] to illustrate the complete end-to-end reasoning and learning cycle within ASPEn. For this we are considering the “Addition” task [17] already described in Example 1 (Sec. 3.1), where the goal is to learn to assign digit values to images of handwritten digits using a weak supervision setup where only the sum of an image pair is provided for training. The ‘Addition’ task within the MNIST dataset is aimed at learning digit values from images, exclusively using only the sum of two digit images as supervision. 

Reasoning. Reasoning in the MNIST “Addition” task refers to finding an as-signment of digit values to two digit images, such that the sum of the two digit values matches the sum provided during supervision. To model this we provide the two images and the possible values as facts. 

> img(img1). img(img2). digit_value(0..9).

The following choice rule then assigns one of the possible digit values (0-9) to a given image. 

> 1{digit(X,V) : digit_value(V)}1 :- img(X).

We energise the atom digit (X, V ) to bind the assignment of a value to a digit image to an energy function that takes the arguments of that atom (i.e., image 

X and value V ) as inputs and returns an energy. 

> energise(digit(X,V)) :- img(X), digit(X,V).

The digit energies are obtained using the following EBM to implement a classi-fication task, by providing energies for image-value pairs, where lower energy is interpreted as higher likeliehood. 

Energy Network: As a neural backbone for predicting and learning digit energies, we employ a convolutional neural network operating on the 28 ×28 grayscale images from the MNIST dataset. The architecture consists of two con-volutional layers, each followed by ReLU activations, to extract hierarchical spa-tial features. A max-pooling layer reduces the spatial resolution, followed by dropout for regularization. The resulting feature maps are flattened and passed through a fully connected layer with ReLU activation and a final linear layer producing ten class-specific logits corresponding to the digit values (0–9). In 10 Suchan et al. +

> (a)

Accuracy Digit Sum 

Single Digit 98.67% 97.54% Double Digit 98.81% 95.33% 

> (b)

Fig. 2: MNIST Addition : (a) Example from MNIST ; (b) Digit and Sum accuracy .

the energy-based formulation, these logits are interpreted as negative energies associated with each digit value. 

Energy based Inference. At the inference stage, we are searching for the most likely assignment of digit images and values, which translates to minimising the overall energy of the stable model, as described in Sec. 3.2. For this we introduce the predicate addition/ 1, which is defined by a rule representing the sum of the two assigned digits: 

> addition(N) :-digit(img1,N1), digit(img2,N2), N = N1+N2.

For instance, for the two digits depicted in Figure 2a we obtain the following stable model as the best solution, with an overall energy of −30 .35 , obtained from aggregating the individual energies for each digit assignment.   

> digit(img1,9). E: -11.13 digit(img2,3). E: -19.22 addition(12). >> Stable Model Energy: -30.35

Sum Supervised Learning. We train the network for 6 epochs based on the contrastive divergence principle described in Sec. 3.2. Specifically, we construct the positive and negative free energies ( F + and F −) by aggregating the ener-gies of stable models: M + accounts for models constrained by the correct sum, while M contrasts this by marginalizing over all unconstrained stable models. To obtain the different sets of stable models, we are using clingos ability to infuse assumptions while solving, i.e., we add the assumption addition (Sum ) → true ,where Sum is given by the added ground truth digit values in the cases for the positive stable models M + and have no constraints for M .

Results. We evaluate neurosymbolic learning with the MNIST dataset in the single digit, as well as the double digit addition task. Digit accuracy and sum accuracy for both tasks, depicted in Table 2b, demonstrate that the trained model is capable of correctly recovering digit values from the weakly supervised training examples. The EBM trained under weak supervision achieves a high per digit classification accuracy of 98 .67% respectively 98 .81% . Crucially, the model successfully scales to weakly supervised two-digit addition, reaching a joint sum accuracy of 95 .33% .ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 11 

4.2 Case of Combinatorial Reasoning: Visual Question Answering with CLEVR 

CLEVR [12] is a visual question-answering (VQA) dataset focusing on combina-torial reasoning with image-question pairs. It has become a standard benchmark for ASP based and neurosymbolic approaches in VQA [7,28]. The main task in CLEVR is to generate answers to diverse questions regarding the scenes, such as the following: 

Q: “What is the shape of the green metal object that is the same size as the blue object? ”Question are given in a json structure involving the questions, answers to the questions, and full supervision for objects and attributes. 

Reasoning. The ASP reasoning logic is given as follows: First we define the possible values for each of the object properties ( color , shape , size , and 

material )

> color(red;blue;green;brown;gray; purple;cyan;yellow). shape(cube;sphere;cylinder). size(small;large). material(rubber;metal).

We use choice rules to assign each object exactly one value for each property:   

> 1{ color(O,C) : color(C) }1 :- obj(O). 1{ shape(O,S) : shape(S) }1 :- obj(O). 1{ size(O,Z) : size(Z) }1 :- obj(O). 1{ material(O,M) : material(M) }1 :- obj(O).

Furthermore, we add spatial relations (lef t _of , right _of , f ront _of , and 

behind _of ) based on the objects 2D positions to handle spatial questions as per the CLEVR specification. Similar as in the MNIST case above, we then energise the property atoms to obtain an energy for the assignment of a specific property to an object. 

> energise(color(O, C)) :- obj(O), color(C). energise(shape(O, S)) :- obj(O), shape(S). energise(size(O, S)) :- obj(O), size(S). energise(material(O,M)):-obj(O),material(M).

These energies then serve as the basis to find the most likely assignment, i.e., to one minimising the overall energy of the resulting stable models. 

Object Detection and Energy based Attribute Prediction. Object detection is following the approach proposed in [7], using a pretrained YOLOv3 architecture, fine-tuned for CLEVR for object detection. In addition to object detection, the network also serves as a feature extractor to obtain object-level features for each detected object resulting in a 15 × 15 × 303 feature map per object. Attribute prediction is based on the extracted feature maps, using EBMs where each attribute type is handled by a specialized neural network that assigns energy values to possible attribute classes. The architecture consists of four attribute-specific heads, each implemented as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP): The size prediction EBM takes as input the concatenation of 12 Suchan et al. 

> (a)

Attribute Accuracy (%) 

Size 99.5 Color 71.8 Material 86.3 Shape 86.2 

VQA 62.85 

> (b)

Fig. 3: Clevr Dataset : (a) Example Scene from CLEVR Dataset ; (b) Individual at-tribute accuracy and VQA accuracy on 15,000 CLEVR image-question pairs. 

the visual feature vector and four normalized bounding box coordinates. The network consists of two hidden layers with 256 units each, employing layer normalization and ReLU activations. The output layer produces two energy values corresponding to small and large. The color prediction EBM takes only the visual feature vector as an input. The network consists of three hidden layers using 512 units in the first two layers and 256 units in the third, again with layer normalization, ReLU, and dropout. The output provides energy values corresponding to the eight color classes. The material and shape 

prediction EBMs follow the standard two-layer design with 256 hidden units in each layer, taking only visual features as input. The material head outputs two energy values for rubber and metal, while the shape head produces three values for cube, sphere, and cylinder. Training of the attribute EBMs is performed fully supervised, using a margin-based hinge loss that encourages correct predictions to have lower energy than incorrect ones by at least a margin m.

Energy based Inference for VQA. For solving the CLEVR VQA task, we are using the functional programs representing the questions, which are provided with the dataset, and translate them to ASP rules by parsing the json structure and extracting the individual steps to answer the question, resulting in a stepwise reasoning strategy, such as the following one: 

> set_0(O) :- obj(O). set_1(O) :- set_0(O), color(O,green). set_2(O) :- set_1(O), material(O,metal). set_3(O) :- obj(O). set_4(O) :- set_3(O), color(O, blue). set_5(O2) :- set_2(O1), set_4(O), size(O1,V), size(O2,V), O1 != O2. answer(C) :- set_5(O), shape(O, C).

This extracted ASP program representing the question is then combined with the logi-cal program above, to generate the answer, i.e., in this case one of the shape attributes. Energy based inference then results in the following stable model and corresponding energies, with the answer to the above question given by the atom answer (sphere ).   

> color(obj5, green). E: 22.39 material(obj5, metal). E: -1.47 size(obj5, large). E: -1.36 shape(obj5, sphere). E: 0.94

ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 13   

> ... color(obj6, blue). E: 13.46 size(obj6, large). E: -1.36 ... answer(sphere). >>Stable Model Energy: 137.11

The stable model grounds the complex referring expression (green metal object) to obj 5,verifies size and match with the blue object ( obj 6), to predict the shape attribute. 

Results. Overall VQA accuracy of 62.85% demonstrates that the energy-based ap-proach successfully bridges visual perception and logical reasoning. The energy for-mulation provides a principled mechanism for visual predictions, enabling the ASP solver to reason over alternative attribute assignments when visual evidence proves ambiguous. 

4.3 Case of Dynamics: Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) Benchmark 

Multi-object tracking (MOT) based on the “tracking-by-detection” paradigm involves associating detections with object tracks over time. 4 The core challenge is to maintain consistent identities across frames under real-world challenges, including occlusion, appearance variation, crowding, and partial observability. In the context of MOT, we first train the EBM separately with extracted features from the YOLO backbone, to associate pairs of detections across frames. Then, during evaluation, we leverage the trained EBM to compute pairwise association energies between active tracks and new detections, populating a structured energy landscape over which the ASP solver reasons. 

ASP-Guided Association with Energy Minimisation. Given a set of active tracks and new detections, the solver must find a globally consistent assignment that respects hard structural and geometric constraints, while minimising the total asso-ciation energy supplied by the EBM. First, tracks and detections are introduced as domain objects. IoU values between each track–detection pair are computed externally and grounded as facts before solving: 

> trk(Trk) :- track_id(Trk). det(Det) :- det_id(Det). iou(Trk, Det, Iou).

Then we enforce a one-to-one assignment between tracks and detections. Every track must either be matched to exactly one detection or declared halted; symmetrically, every detection must either be matched to an existing track or initialised as a new one: 

> { match(Det, Trk) : det(Det); halt(Trk) } = 1 :- trk(Trk). { match(Det, Trk) : trk(Trk); new_track(Det) } = 1 :- det(Det).

For each detection matched to a track, we generate an assign predicate, which serves as a control token, causing the assignment in the tracking cycle.  

> assign(Det, Trk) :- match(Det, Trk).
> 4

MOT is a computer vision community established benchmark focussing on Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) [5]., https://motchallenge.net/data/MOT17 14 Suchan et al. Spatially implausible associations are ruled out via a hard constraint. Any candidate match whose IoU falls below a fixed threshold is forbidden, acting as a symbolic spatial guard independent of appearance energy: 

> :- match(Det, Trk), iou(Trk, Det, IOU), IOU < iou_threshold.

We energise the atom match (Det, T rk ), coupling it with an energy function corre-sponding to the likelihood that detection Det is matched with track T rk .

> energy(match(Det, Trk)) :- match(Det, Trk).

ASPEn then optimises for the stable model with minimum aggregate EBM energy among all those satisfying above constraints. In essence, the combinatorial structure of valid assignments is expressed declaratively, while the preference among them is determined by the learned energy landscape. 

Tracking. The above ASPEn program is solved for each time-step, providing the op-timal assignments of detections to tracks, given the energy values for possible matches. As an example consider, the two frames in Fig. 4a, where on the left are object tracks for ti and on the right are detections for ti+1 . Associations in the obtained stable model match these detections to the existing object tracks. The tracking logic implements the assignments and maintains the object tracks. In addition, the tracker maintains explicit lifecycle states for each track ( tentative , confirmed , or deleted ), and coordinates in-stantiation and deletion of tracks based on thresholds for consecutive matches resp. misses of maintained object tracks. 

EBM Architecture and Training. Features are extracted from a pre-trained YOLO26X backbone via ROI-pooled global average pooling over the penultimate fea-ture map, yielding a feature vector for each detection alongside its normalised bounding box. The EBM combines two branches, (i) an appearance branch processing the pair-wise feature maps for obtaining energies corresponding to visual similarity through an MLP; and (ii) a geometry branch processing spatial features obtained from the two bounding boxes through a separate lightweight MLP for energies corresponding to geometric similarity. Both outcomes are combined via a learned scalar weight. The model is trained with a contrastive loss, which drives the energy of positive pairs below that of all negatives. Training data is constructed from MOT17, where for each an-chor detection in frame t, a positive is sampled from the same track in a future frame 

t+δ (with δ ≤ 30 ), and K negatives are drawn from other tracks in the same frame, with hard-negative mining retaining the most energetically confusing negatives during training. 

Results. We evaluate on the MOT17 benchmark with HOTA, MOTA, IDF1 as pri-mary metrics (Table 4b; training data sequences split into halves for training and validation). Results demonstrate that EBM, trained purely on pairwise contrastive objectives, can serve as an effective matching criteria within the declarative tracking pipeline. HOTA score reflects a balanced account of detection and association quality, while IDF1 captures the consistency of track identities over time; both are directly influenced by the quality of the ASP-guided assignment. The overall results are com-parable with trackers of similar character and capacity. Tables 1 and 2 report verbatim runtime and structural statistics collected during experimental evaluation. These re-sults showcase that ASP with energised atoms scale to real world domains with over 1000 energy atoms per frame and a grounding time for the energy atoms of less then 30% of total grounding time. ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 15 ti ti+1 

> Abducing Object Assignments
> (a)

Metric Result HOTA 43.26 

MOTA 36.37 

IDF1 49.89 

> (b)

Fig. 4: Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) : (a) Abductive inference for maintaining object tracks ; (b) Tracking performance with standard MOT metrics .Table 1: ASPEn for MOT . Per-frame Runtime Statistics .

Component Mean Std Min Max 

Feature Extraction Time 0.0780 0.0062 0.0547 0.8763 EBM Time 0.0101 0.0029 0.0013 0.0693 Grounding Time (Base) 0.0013 0.0004 0.0003 0.0046 Grounding Time (Energy) 0.0005 0.0002 8.297e-05 0.0031 Total Grounding Time 0.0018 0.0006 0.0004 0.0055 Solving Time 0.0031 0.0011 0.0004 0.0127 

# 5 Discussion and Related Work 

Systematic neurosymbolic integrations involving answer set programming primarily follow two different mechanisms: (1) . One approach involves extensions of ASP intro-ducing neural predicates whose truth values are derived from subsymbolic perception models [27]; and (2) . Another approach has been neurosymbolic integration following a hybrid architecture (without neural predicates) in the manner of [24], by the develop-ment of specialised extensions building upon functional generalisation of ASP, called an-swer set programming modulo theories (ASPMT) [2]. In the second approach building on functional ASPMT, specialised extensions for handling spatio-temporal dynamics in a foundational manner have been developed with ASPMT( QS ) [26]; this provides a uni-fied mechanism for neurosymbolic reasoning about space, events, actions, and change in real-world (real-time) domains involving quantitative, dynamic sensor data such as video [24,25,23]. Such a foundation then directly powers modular integration with deep learning based computer vision techniques and neurosymbolic capabilities –e.g., encom-passing question-answering, relational learning, visuospatial abduction– driven by non-monotonic reasoning over continuous space-time structures, and supporting expressive modelling of motion, interaction, and spatio-temporal histories (while also retaining ASP’s model-theoretic foundations). ASPEn is a novel methodology for declarative neurosymbolic reasoning and learning in a manner that is end-to-end, and designed for 16 Suchan et al. Table 2: ASPEn for MOT . Structural Properties of Computed Stable Models .

Average over MOT Sequences: Mean Std Min Max 

Number of Frames per Sequence 379.8571 – – –Time per Frame 0.2 – – –Number of Energy Atoms per Frame 339.3938 145.4837 30.0 1058.0 Number of Model Atoms per Frame 36.7236 8.0008 14.0 69.0 

challenging real-world dynamic domains. By tightly integrating ASP’s non-monotonic semantics with continuous optimisation, ASPEn offers a principled path toward ex-pressive and explainable reasoning systems especially for dynamic interactive domains. ASP plays a central role in the proposed neurosymbolic methodology; its stable-model semantics provides a robust declarative mechanism for non-monotonic model construc-tion, supporting defaults, exceptions, and abductive explanations that are indispensable in real-world dynamic domains (e.g., cognitive robotics, autonomous vehicles). These features fundamentally distinguish ASPEn from logic programming and monotonic probabilistic frameworks, which do not support non-monotonic revision and optimisa-tion over alternative world models. 

# 6 Conclusion and Outlook 

ASPEn can be either used as an independent neurosymbolic reasoning and learning en-gine for standalone application purposes, or it may be used as a experimental platform 

to advance basic works aimed at integration of KR and ML research. Our outlook is driven by the observation that existing mainstream ML evaluation paradigms remain ill-suited for systems that must jointly learn and reason under incomplete, evolving, and structured knowledge. Advancements are needed in developing (KR-centric) neu-rosymbolic benchmarking methods that explicitly test how learned representations in-teract with declarative constraints, defaults, and optimisation-based model selection. We posit that general frameworks tightly integrating declarative KR formalisms with trainable substrates (such as EBMs) make it possible to examine questions central to KR, e.g., how symbolic structure shapes learning dynamics, how learning alters ad-missible world models, and how non-monotonic reasoning behaves under uncertainty. Without such (KR-centric) methodologies (and benchmarks), progress risks collapsing to purely quantitative performance measures, leaving core KR competencies such as abduction, induction, explanation, and belief revision largely unexamined in end-to-end systems. 

# References 

1. AI HLEG: High-level expert group on artificial intelligence: Ethical guide-lines for trustworthy ai (2019), https://www.aepd.es/sites/default/files/2019-12/ ai-ethics-guidelines.pdf 2. Bartholomew, M., Lee, J.: Functional stable model semantics and answer set pro-gramming modulo theories. In: IJCAI 2013, Procee. of 23rd Intern. Joint Conf. ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 17 on Artificial Intelligence. pp. 718–724. IJCAI/AAAI (2013), http://www.aaai.org/ ocs/index.php/IJCAI/IJCAI13/paper/view/6894 3. Bhatt, M., Suchan, J.: Artificial visual intelligence - perceptual commonsense for human-centred cognitive technologies. In: Chetouani, M., Dignum, V., Lukowicz, P., Sierra, C. (eds.) Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence - Advanced Lectures, 18th European Advanced Course on AI, ACAI 2021, Berlin, Germany, Octo-ber 11-15, 2021, extended and improved lecture notes. Lecture Notes in Com-puter Science, vol. 13500, pp. 216–242. Springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-24349-3_12, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24349-3_12 4. Brewka, G., Eiter, T., Truszczyński, M.: Answer set programming at a glance. Comm. ACM 54 (12), 92–103 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1145/2043174.2043195 5. Dendorfer, P., Rezatofighi, S.H., Milan, A., Shi, J., Cremers, D., Reid, I.D., Roth, S., Schindler, K., Leal-Taixé, L.: CVPR19 tracking and detection challenge: How crowded can it get? CoRR abs/1906.04567 (2019), http://arxiv.org/abs/1906. 04567 6. Eiter, T., Hadl, J., Ruiz, N.H., Lange, L., Oetsch, J., Scheuvens, B., Strötgen, J.: Explainable zero-shot visual question answering via logic-based reasoning. In: H. Gilpin, L., Giunchiglia, E., Hitzler, P., van Krieken, E. (eds.) Proceedings of The 19th International Conference on Neurosymbolic Learning and Reasoning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 284, pp. 977–991. PMLR (08–10 Sep 2025), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v284/eiter25a.html 7. Eiter, T., Higuera, N., Oetsch, J., Pritz, M.: A neuro-symbolic asp pipeline for visual question answering. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 22 (5), 739–754 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068422000229 8. EU Commission: Proposal for a regulation of the european parliament and of the council laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act) and amending certain union legislative acts (2021), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206 9. Garcez, A.d., Lamb, L.C.: Neurosymbolic ai: the 3rd wave. Artif. Intell. Rev. 

56 (11), 12387–12406 (Mar 2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w 10. Gebser, M., Kaminski, R., Kaufmann, B., Schaub, T.: Answer Set Solving in Prac-tice. Morgan & Claypool Publishers (2012) 11. Gebser, M., Kaminski, R., Kaufmann, B., Schaub, T.: Clingo = ASP + control: Preliminary report. CoRR abs/1405.3694 (2014) 12. Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., van der Maaten, L., Fei-Fei, L., Zitnick, C.L., Gir-shick, R.B.: CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and ele-mentary visual reasoning. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017. pp. 1988– 1997. IEEE Computer Society (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.215, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.215 13. LeCun, Y., Chopra, S., Hadsell, R., Ranzato, M., Huang, F.J.: A tutorial on energy-based learning. In: Bakir, G., Hofman, T., Schölkopf, B., Smola, A., Taskar, B. (eds.) Predicting Structured Data. pp. 192–241. MIT Press (2006) 14. LeCun, Y., Cortes, C.: MNIST handwritten digit database (2010), http://yann. lecun.com/exdb/mnist/ 15. Lee, J., Talsania, S., Wang, Y.: Computing LPMLN using ASP and MLN solvers. Theory Pract. Log. Program. 17 (5-6), 942–960 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1017/ S1471068417000400 16. Lifschitz, V.: Answer Set Programming. Springer (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-24658-7, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-24658-7 18 Suchan et al. 17. Manhaeve, R., Dumancic, S., Kimmig, A., Demeester, T., Raedt, L.D.: Deep-problog: Neural probabilistic logic programming. In: Bengio, S., Wallach, H.M., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Garnett, R. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada. pp. 3753–3763 (2018), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/ dc5d637ed5e62c36ecb73b654b05ba2a-Abstract.html 18. Nordic Innovation: Nordic ethical ai expert group: Policy recommendations for ethical and responsible ai (2024), https://www.nordicinnovation.org/2024/ nordic-ethical-ai-expert-group 19. Padalkar, P., Gupta, G.: Symbolic rule extraction from attention-guided sparse representations in vision transformers. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 

25 (4), 722–738 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068425100318 20. Schaub, T., Woltran, S.: Special issue on answer set programming. KI 32 (2-3), 101– 103 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-018-0554-8, https://doi.org/10.1007/ s13218-018-0554-8 21. Suchan, J., Bhatt, M.: Semantic question-answering with video and eye-tracking data: AI foundations for human visual perception driven cognitive film studies. In: Kambhampati, S. (ed.) Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2016, New York, NY, USA, 9-15 July 2016. pp. 2633–2639. IJCAI/AAAI Press (2016), http://www.ijcai.org/Abstract/ 16/374 22. Suchan, J., Bhatt, M., Monsen, J.: ASP Driven visual commonsense: A general framework for reasoning about embodied interaction in the wild. In: Ortiz, M., Wassermann, R., Schaub, T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 22nd International Confer-ence on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2025, Mel-bourne, Australia, November 11-17, 2025 (2025). https://doi.org/10.24963/KR. 2025/61, https://doi.org/10.24963/kr.2025/61 23. Suchan, J., Bhatt, M., Monsen, J.: ASP-driven visual commonsense: a general framework for reasoning about embodied interaction in the wild. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. KR ’25 (2025). https://doi.org/10.24963/kr.2025/61, https://doi. org/10.24963/kr.2025/61 24. Suchan, J., Bhatt, M., Varadarajan, S.: Out of sight but not out of mind: An answer set programming based online abduction framework for visual sensemaking in autonomous driving. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019. pp. 1879–1885. ijcai.org (2019). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/260 25. Suchan, J., Bhatt, M., Varadarajan, S.: Commonsense visual sensemaking for au-tonomous driving - on generalised neurosymbolic online abduction integrating vi-sion and semantics. Artif. Intell. 299 , 103522 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/J. ARTINT.2021.103522, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103522 26. Wałęga, P.A., Schultz, C.P.L., Bhatt, M.: Non-monotonic spatial reasoning with answer set programming modulo theories. TPLP 17 (2), 205–225 (2017). https:// doi.org/10.1017/S1471068416000193, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068416000193 27. Yang, Z., Ishay, A., Lee, J.: Neurasp: Embracing neural networks into answer set programming. In: Bessiere, C. (ed.) Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-20. pp. 1755–1762. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization (7 2020). https://doi.org/ 10.24963/ijcai.2020/243, https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2020/243, main track ASPEn – Answer Set Programming Energised ! 19 28. Yi, K., Wu, J., Gan, C., Torralba, A., Kohli, P., Tenenbaum, J.B.: Neural-symbolic vqa: disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. In: Pro-ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. p. 1039–1050. NeurIPS’18, Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2018)