Title: From Triggers to Emotions: A CPM-Grounded Appraisal Multi-Agent for Dynamic Emotional Evolution in Persona-Based Dialogue

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07824v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 00:13:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
## From Triggers to Emotions: A CPM-Grounded Appraisal Multi-Agent for Dynamic Emotional Evolution in Persona-Based Dialogue 

Jingyao Cai 1, Shuaijun Liu 2, Abdul Rehman 1, Yutong Guo 1,Qin Tian 3, Thomas Dolby 4, Sue Green 5, Chantel Cox 5,Xiaosong Yang 1

> 1

National Centre for Computer Animation, Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, United Kingdom, 

> 2

Information Hub, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China, 

> 3

Key Laboratory of Child Cognition & Behavior Development of Hainan Province, Qiongtai Normal University, Haikou, China, 

> 4

Chief Technology Officer, i3 Simulations Ltd, United Kingdom, 

> 5

School of Health and Care, Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, United Kingdom 

> {jcai, arehman, s5819307, sgreen, ccox, xyang}@bournemouth.ac.uk, sliu529@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, qintian@mail.qtnu.edu.cn, tom@i3simulations.com

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have substan-tially advanced persona-based dialogue agents for emotion-sensitive role simulation in health-care, education, counseling, customer service, and interactive storytelling. However, two re-lated lines of work leave a key gap. Persona-based dialogue systems often encode emotions as static traits or surface-level stylistic cues, and affective dialogue research has largely fo-cused on empathetic response generation to-ward users rather than modeling the agent per-sona’s own evolving emotional state. As a re-sult, trigger-driven emotional evolution within a character remains underexplored. To ad-dress this limitation, we draw inspiration from the Component Process Model (CPM), a psy-chological theory that views emotion as a dy-namic process shaped by the appraisal of ex-ternal events. We propose CPM-MultiAgent, a CPM-grounded emotion evolution multi-agent framework for supporting emotional changes in persona-based dialogue. Instead of treat-ing a character’s emotion as a fixed attribute, CPM-MultiAgent represents it as a latent state that is continuously reshaped by dialogue trig-gers. Through affective trigger extraction, CPM-based collaborative appraisal, and emo-tion state updating, the framework enables more emotionally consistent role simulation in multi-turn interactions.Experiments with base-line comparisons, ablation studies, human eval-uation, and case analyses demonstrate that CPM-MultiAgent effectively models dynamic emotional evolution in emotionally sensitive role-simulation settings. 

1 Introduction 

Emotion-sensitive role simulation has become an important setting for persona-based dialogue sys-tems. In healthcare communication training (Wang et al., 2024b), counseling (Wang et al., 2025b), ed-ucation (Martynova et al., 2025), and negotiation (Liu and Long, 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Cohen et al., 2025; Long et al., 2025), dialogue agents are expected to portray characters whose responses are shaped not only by identities, backgrounds, and goals, but also by evolving emotional states. Such dynamics are crucial for realistic interactions in-volving uncertainty, conflict, empathy, persuasion, or social support. A central challenge is that a character’s emotion is often triggered and reshaped by external dia-logue events. For example, a patient’s anxiety may increase under diagnostic uncertainty, a student’s confidence may change after teacher feedback, and a customer’s frustration may decrease when their concern is acknowledged. These cases suggest that persona emotions should be modeled not as fixed attributes or surface-level response styles, but as dynamic states evolving with triggers interpreted against the character’s persona, goals, and context. However, existing studies have not fully ad-dressed how a character’s own emotional state evolves under such triggers. Many persona-based dialogue systems model emotion as a static at-tribute or predefined control signal (Wang et al., 2024b; Shao et al., 2023), while affective dialogue research largely focuses on recognizing users’ emo-tions and generating empathetic responses (Xu et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025; Yan et al., 2024). Al-though useful for social support, these approaches mainly concern what emotion is expressed or how the agent should respond to the user’s emotion, and may lead to overly positive, intensified, or formu-laic expressions (Wang et al., 2025c). They there-fore provide limited support for modeling how a simulated character’s own emotion changes when new external stimuli arise. To address this question, this work draws on the Component Process Model (CPM) (Scherer arXiv:2607.07824v1 [cs.MA] 8 Jul 2026 et al., 2001), a psychological appraisal theory that explains emotions as arising from structured evalu-ations of external events in relation to an individ-ual’s concerns, goals, and coping conditions. This view aligns naturally with trigger-driven emotion modeling: a dialogue stimulus does not directly determine an emotion, but must be appraised with respect to the character’s persona, situation, and prior emotional state. CPM therefore provides a principled scaffold for transforming dialogue trig-gers into coherent emotional state updates. Based on this insight, this work proposes CPM-MultiAgent, an Emotion Evolution Multi-Agent framework for trigger-driven emotional state mod-eling in persona-based dialogue, as shown in Fig-ure 1. The framework organizes emotion evolution as a staged appraisal process. First, a Trigger Ana-lyzer Agent extracts affectively salient stimuli from the current dialogue turn and identifies affective triggers. Next, four CPM Appraisal Agents evalu-ate these triggers from complementary CPM per-spectives: relevance, implications, coping potential, and normative significance. Their appraisals are synthesized by an Integration Agent, which updates the character’s latent emotion state based on the prior state, persona-grounded context, and current appraisal evidence. Before response generation, a Critic Agent audits the transition for CPM faithful-ness and contextual consistency, and the calibrated emotion state is used as an intermediate affective representation for emotionally consistent response generation. This multi-agent design reflects the decompositional nature of CPM, where trigger de-tection, multi-dimensional appraisal, state revision, and consistency checking impose different reason-ing requirements. Separating these roles makes the intermediate affective reasoning more explicit and reduces the risk that a single agent conflates appraisal, emotion updating, and response genera-tion. The main contributions are threefold: (1) a novel framework, CPM-MultiAgent, for model-ing trigger-driven emotional evolution in emotion-sensitive persona-based dialogue, shifting the focus from static emotion control to character-internal state dynamics; (2) a new operationalization of the Component Process Model in LLM-based di-alogue agents through structured appraisal and la-tent emotion state updating, linking dialogue trig-gers to emotional transitions in a psychologically grounded way; and (3) comprehensive experiments, including baseline comparisons, ablation studies, LLM-as-judge assessment, human evaluation, and case studies, demonstrating the effectiveness and generalizability of the framework across diverse role-simulation scenarios. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Role-Playing Dialogue Agent 

Recent role-playing agents (RPAs) aim to generate role-consistent responses by conditioning models on persona profiles, dialogue data, memories, or reconstructed experiences. General methods such as Character-LLM (Shao et al., 2023), RoleLLM (Wang et al., 2024a), and Chat-Haruhi (Li et al., 2023) build character agents via experience re-construction, role-data retrieval, or persona-based prompting. This paradigm has further been ap-plied to domain-specific simulations, including stu-dent agents for tutoring and classroom interaction (Martynova et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2024; Sonkar et al., 2024), customer agents for shopping and service evalua-tion (Sun et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a), and pa-tient simulation for healthcare training (Wang et al., 2024b). However, emotion is usually treated as a fixed persona trait or prompt-level control signal, rather than a dynamic state evolving with dialogue triggers. 

2.2 Emotional Support and Empathetic Conversation 

Emotion has been extensively studied in empa-thetic dialogue and emotional support conversa-tion (ESC), where the goal is to recognize users’ emotional needs and generate supportive responses (Liu et al., 2021). Early ESC methods fine-tune pre-trained language models, such as TransESC (Zhao et al., 2023) and MISC (Tu et al., 2022), while recent LLM-based systems, including SoulChat (Chen et al., 2023) and CPsyCounX (Zhang et al., 2024), leverage counseling or empathy-oriented dialogue data. Other studies incorporate psycho-logical knowledge, such as CBT-inspired data con-struction (Yang et al., 2025b), or adopt multi-agent and multimodal designs, including MultiAgentESC (Xu et al., 2025), PerceptiveAgent (Yan et al., 2024), EMO-Avatar (Chen et al., 2025), and Project Riley (Ortigoso et al., 2025). Overall, these works mainly focus on understanding and responding to users’ emotions, while rarely modeling the agent character’s own turn-level emotional evolution. Figure 1: The overview of our proposed CPM-MultiAgent framework. 

2.3 Dynamic Emotion Modeling in Dialogue 

Recent studies have begun to model emotion as a changing dialogue state. AnnaAgent (Wang et al., 2025b) controls seeker simulation in counsel-ing through emotion modulation and multi-session memory. In negotiation, EQ-Negotiator (Liu and Long, 2025) combines emotion recognition with game-theoretic and HMM-based policies, while EvoEmo (Long et al., 2025) formulates emotion transitions as an MDP for multi-turn bargaining. Sentipolis (Fu et al., 2026) maintains continu-ous PAD states with decay and emotion–memory coupling for social simulation. Appraisal theory has also been introduced into emotion modeling, as in the Third-Person Appraisal Agent (Hong et al., 2025), which simulates emotional reason-ing through primary appraisal, secondary appraisal, and reappraisal. However, existing studies are of-ten scenario-specific or emphasize emotional conti-nuity and task-oriented policy optimization, leav-ing external trigger-driven emotional updates in persona-based dialogue underexplored. 

3 Methodology 

In this section, we introduce CPM-MultiAgent, a multi-agent framework for trigger-driven emotion modeling in persona-based dialogue. It is grounded in the CPM , which views emotion as arising from the appraisal of stimuli with respect to an individ-ual’s concerns, goals, and coping conditions. In our setting, the primary stimuli are external dialogue events, such as the latest user utterance and recent interaction context, while the persona profile, sce-nario, memory, and previous emotion state serve as internal appraisal context. As shown in Figure 1, CPM-MultiAgent decomposes emotional evolution into three stages. In Trigger Analysis , a Trigger Analyzer Agent identifies affectively salient exter-nal stimuli from the current turn and recent his-tory, grounded in the character’s persona, scenario, memory, and prior state. In CPM-based Emo-tion Appraisal , four appraisal agents assess the triggers along complementary CPM dimensions: relevance, implications, coping potential, and nor-mative significance, with further CPM details pro-vided in Section 3.1. An Integration Agent then synthesizes their appraisals to update the charac-ter’s latent emotion state. In Consistency Critique ,a Critic Agent checks CPM faithfulness, contex-tual grounding, and temporal coherence before the calibrated emotion state is used as an intermediate affective representation for response generation. 

3.1 Component Process Model Grounded Emotion Modeling 

The CPM (Scherer et al., 2001) views emotion as a dynamic process arising from the appraisal of Figure 2: CPM appraisal structure used in our frame-work. 

events or stimuli, rather than as a fixed affective label. In CPM, the same event may lead to differ-ent emotions depending on how it is evaluated with respect to an individual’s concerns, goals, coping conditions, and norms. The appraisal process is organized into four major checks. Relevance de-termines whether a stimulus is novel, pleasant or unpleasant, and relevant to the character’s goals. 

Implication estimates the stimulus’s causes, ex-pectedness, likely outcomes, goal conduciveness, and urgency. Coping potential assesses whether the character can control, adapt to, or cope with the consequences. Normative significance evaluates whether the event is compatible with the character’s self-concept and social norms. Each check contains finer-grained stimulus evaluation checks (SECs), detailed in Appendix A. Figure 2 summarizes this appraisal structure. CPM is well suited to dynamic emotional evo-lution in persona-based dialogue. In our setting, each dialogue turn may introduce an external trigger, while the persona profile, scenario, dia-logue history, and prior emotional state provide the character-specific basis for appraisal. This moti-vates our multi-agent design: different agents focus on different CPM checks, and their outputs are in-tegrated into a coherent emotion update. The CPM perspective also supports modeling emotion as a gradual and multi-dimensional state, allowing mul-tiple emotions to co-exist and evolve with different intensities across turns. 

3.2 Trigger Analysis Layer 

The Trigger Analysis Layer converts the current dialogue turn into a structured affective trigger rep-resentation. It does not directly infer the character’s new emotion; instead, it prepares appraisal by clar-ifying what happened, grounding the event in the character’s persona and dialogue context, and iden-tifying CPM-related stimulus evaluation cues for subsequent appraisal agents. 

Trigger Analyzer Agent. At dialogue turn t, the Trigger Analyzer Agent takes as input the persona profile P , scenario context S, dialogue memory M ,recent dialogue history Ht, previous emotion state 

Et−1, and main trigger Tt. It outputs an analysis pack At:

At = TriggerAnalyzer( P, S, M, H t, E t−1, T t).

(1) The analysis pack organizes the trigger before appraisal and consists of three parts. The objective trigger structure Ot abstracts the factual structure of the current event, including what happens, who is involved, what action is performed, and how the trigger is positioned in the current dialogue turn. The persona-grounded context Gt connects the trigger with the character’s identity, goals, re-lationships, dialogue memory, and previous emo-tional state. The potential SEC cue set Ct organizes appraisal-relevant cues according to the CPM struc-ture. 

At = {Ot, G t, C t}. (2) Following the CPM structure illustrated in Fig-ure 2, Ct is organized into four appraisal-check groups. Relevance Crel  

> t

includes novelty, intrinsic pleasantness, and goal relevance. Implication Cimp 

> t

includes causal attribution, outcome probability, expectation discrepancy, goal conduciveness, and urgency. Coping potential Ccop  

> t

includes control, power, and adjustment. Normative significance 

Cnorm  

> t

includes internal and external standards: 

Ct = {Crel  

> t

= {c1

> t, rel

, c 2

> t, rel

, c 3

> t, rel

},Cimp  

> t

= {c1

> t, imp

, . . . , c 5

> t, imp

},Ccop  

> t

= {c1

> t, cop

, c 2

> t, cop

, c 3

> t, cop

},Cnorm  

> t

= {c1

> t, norm

, c 2

> t, norm

}} .

(3) In this way, the Trigger Analyzer Agent trans-forms raw dialogue input into a CPM-oriented trigger representation, while leaving appraisal and emotion updating to the following multi-agent ap-praisal layer. 

3.3 CPM Emotion Appraisal Layer 

The CPM Emotion Appraisal Layer performs struc-tured appraisal over the analysis pack At =

{Ot, G t, C t} produced by the Trigger Analysis Layer. It contains four CPM appraisal agents, corresponding to relevance, implication, coping potential, and normative significance, and one In-tegration Agent. The appraisal questions are de-rived from CPM’s Information Assessed during Appraisal, with SECs guiding each check; detailed questions and SEC dimensions are provided in Ap-pendix A. The agents follow a CPM-inspired dy-namic and recursive order, where later checks con-dition on previous results and may revise earlier interpretations through peer review. The refined results are then passed to the Integration Agent for emotion state update. 

Relevance Appraisal Agent. The Relevance Appraisal Agent evaluates whether the trigger af-fects the character, the character’s goals, or the character’s social group. It takes Ot, Gt, and Crel 

> t

as input, and produces the relevance appraisal re-sult Rt:

Rt = RelAgent( Ot, G t, C rel  

> t

). (4) 

Implication Appraisal Agent. The Implica-tion Appraisal Agent evaluates the trigger’s conse-quences for the character’s well-being and short- or long-term goals. It takes Ot, Gt, Cimp  

> t

, and Rt as input, and produces the implication appraisal result 

It:

It = ImpAgent( Ot, G t, C imp  

> t

, R t). (5) 

Coping Potential Appraisal Agent. The Cop-ing Potential Appraisal Agent evaluates how well the character can cope with or adjust to the conse-quences identified above. It takes Ot, Gt, Ccop  

> t

, Rt,and It as input, and produces the coping potential appraisal result Kt:

Kt = CopAgent( Ot, G t, C cop  

> t

, R t, I t). (6) 

Normative Significance Appraisal Agent. The Normative Significance Appraisal Agent evaluates the trigger with respect to the character’s self-concept, social norms, and values, including its consistency with internal standards and external ex-pectations. It takes Ot, Gt, Cnorm  

> t

, Rt, It, and Kt

as input, and produces the normative significance appraisal result Nt:

Nt = NormAgent( Ot, G t, C norm  

> t

, R t, I t, K t).

(7) 

Peer Review. After the four agents complete their initial appraisals, they conduct peer review to check the coherence of the appraisal chain. The initial appraisal set is: 

Xt = {Rt, I t, K t, N t}. (8) During peer review, the agents examine whether the appraisal results are consistent with the trigger, persona-grounded context, and previous emotional state. The refined appraisal set is: 

eXt = PeerReview( Xt, O t, G t, E t−1). (9) This process allows later checks to challenge or revise earlier ones, reflecting the dynamic and re-cursive structure of CPM. 

Integration Agent. The Integration Agent ag-gregates the refined appraisal results and updates the character’s full emotional state. Let the emotion taxonomy be Y = {y1, y 2, . . . , y K }. The previous emotional state records the intensity of each emo-tion label: 

Et−1 = {(yk, e t−1,k )}Kk=1 . (10) The Integration Agent takes eXt, Et−1, and Y as input, and produces an emotion change vector ∆t:

∆t = EmotionDelta( eXt, E t−1, Y). (11) For each emotion label yk, the updated intensity is computed as: 

et,k = clip( et−1,k + ∆ t,k ). (12) The final output Ut contains the updated emo-tion state Et, emotion change vector ∆t, refined appraisal set eXt, and update rationale Zt:

Ut = {Et, ∆t, eXt, Z t}. (13) 

3.4 Consistency Critique Layer Critic Agent. The Consistency Critique Layer re-views trigger analysis and emotion appraisal results before response generation. At turn t, the original context is denoted as Ωt, containing the persona profile P , scenario context S, dialogue memory M ,recent dialogue history Ht, previous emotion state 

Et−1, and main trigger Tt:

Ωt = {P, S, M, H t, E t−1, T t}. (14) The Critic Agent takes Ωt, the analysis pack At,and the emotion-layer output Ut, and produces a critique decision Qt:

Qt = CriticAgent(Ω t, A t, U t). (15) It checks CPM faithfulness, context grounding, appraisal coherence, and emotion-update validity, Algorithm 1 Consistency Critique Layer 

Require: Original context Ωt, analysis pack At,emotion-layer output Ut, maximum revision rounds R

Ensure: Final emotion-layer output bUt 

> 1:

for r = 0 to R do  

> 2:

Qt ← CriticAgent(Ω t, A t, U t) 

> 3:

Parse Qt = {vt, ℓ t, b t} 

> 4:

if vt = approve or r = R then  

> 5:

return bUt ← Ut 

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

if ℓt ∈ { trigger , both } then  

> 8:

At ← TriggerAnalyzer(Ω t, b t) 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

Ut ← AppraisalLayer( At, E t−1, Y, b t) 

> 11:

end for 

ensuring that SEC cues, contextual evidence, ap-praisal results, and the updated emotion state are mutually consistent. The decision contains a ver-dict vt, target layer ℓt, and critique rationale bt:

Qt = {vt, ℓ t, b t}. (16) Here, vt indicates whether the output is approved or requires regeneration, ℓt specifies the layer to revise, and bt records the rationale. As summarized in Algorithm 1, if vt = approve ,the current output is accepted. Otherwise, bt is sent back to the target layer for revision and rechecked, with the process bounded by a maximum revision budget R.

4 Experiment Setup 

4.1 Tasks and Scenarios 

We evaluate CPM-MultiAgent on dynamic emo-tional state update in emotion-sensitive persona-based dialogue. Given the persona, scenario con-text, dialogue history, latest user utterance, and previous emotional state, the model updates a multi-dimensional emotional state, where multi-ple emotion labels may coexist with Likert-5 in-tensity scores, and provides an explanation for the update. We consider three role-simulation scenar-ios: healthcare training, educational communica-tion and customer service. Our experiments are conducted on 24 persona-based dialogue trials con-structed under these three representative scenarios, with varied initial emotional states and trigger ut-terances designed to elicit different emotional tra-jectories. Detailed scenario settings, trigger types, role configurations, and emotion taxonomies are provided in Appendix B. 

4.2 Baselines 

We compare CPM-MultiAgent with several prompting-based and agent-based baselines. The prompting baselines include Zero-shot (Brown et al., 2020), Few-shot (Brown et al., 2020), Zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), Few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022), Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022), and Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023), covering direct inference, in-context learning, explicit rea-soning, multiple-sample aggregation, and itera-tive revision. In addition, we compare with EQ-Negotiator (Liu and Long, 2025), an LLM-agent framework with an emotion-shift module designed for credit dialogues. Since EQ-Negotiator is orig-inally tailored to a specific dialogue setting, role configuration, and discrete emotion categories, we adapt its input information and emotion representa-tion as closely as possible to our task setting while preserving its original update mechanism. For a fair comparison, all baselines are provided with the same persona, scenario, dialogue context, lat-est user utterance, and previous emotional state whenever applicable. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics 

Since existing emotion dialogue datasets mainly provide emotion annotations rather than gold-standard mappings from external dialogue triggers to dynamic emotional transitions, standard label accuracy is not suitable for our task. Following expert review from a psychological perspective, we evaluate emotional state updates along six dimen-sions that align with language-triggered emotion modeling in dialogue systems: Emotional Update Correctness, Trigger Grounding, Temporal Consis-tency, Persona Consistency, Appraisal Reasoning Quality, and Overall Quality. Each metric is rated on a 1–5 Likert scale, where higher scores indi-cate better quality. The same metric set is used for both LLM-as-judge evaluation and human evalu-ation. Detailed metric definitions are provided in Appendix C. 

4.4 Implementation Details 

We implement CPM-MultiAgent with LangGraph , where all agents use GPT-5.4 as the backbone model unless otherwise specified. For robustness experiments, we additionally evaluate the frame-work with LLM backbones of different capacities. Method EUC ↑ TG ↑ TC ↑ PC ↑ ARQ ↑ Overall ↑                                

> Zero-shot 4.261 4.156 4.700 4.350 4.611 4.283 Few-shot 4.228 4.128 4.689 4.317 4.556 4.239 Zero-shot CoT 4.239 4.139 4.717 4.328 4.667 4.267 Few-shot CoT 4.211 4.117 4.718 4.300 4.611 4.256 Self-consistency 4.172 4.073 4.728 4.289 4.667 4.200 Self-Refine 4.178 4.083 4.761 4.350 4.722 4.283 EQ-Negotiator 4.222 4.172 4.767 4.372 4.778 4.311 Ours 4.305 4.189 4.806 4.378 4.833 4.322

Table 1: LLM-as-judge evaluation results. Higher scores indicate better performance. 

The LLM-as-judge evaluation also uses GPT-5.4. During generation, we set the temperature to 0.2 and top-p to 1.0; for judging, we set the tempera-ture to 0 to improve evaluation stability. To ensure fair comparison, candidate outputs are anonymized and randomly shuffled before evaluation, so neither the LLM judge nor human annotators can access method identities. Human evaluation is conducted by 103 annotators under a blind evaluation setting. Prompts are provided in Appendix D. 

5 Results and Analysis 

5.1 LLM-as-Judge Evaluation 

We first conduct an LLM-as-judge evaluation to compare CPM-MultiAgent with the baseline meth-ods. As shown in Table 1, CPM-MultiAgent achieves the best performance across all evaluation metrics. The improvement is especially clear in Appraisal Reasoning Quality, indicating that CPM-based structured appraisal helps produce more coherent and psychologically plausible explana-tions for emotion updates. CPM-MultiAgent also obtains higher scores in Trigger Grounding and Temporal Consistency, suggesting that the frame-work better captures dialogue-triggered emotional changes while maintaining coherence with previ-ous emotional states. These results show the effec-tiveness of CPM-MultiAgent for updating a char-acter’s own emotional state in emotion-sensitive persona-based dialogue. 

5.2 Human Evaluation 

We further conduct a human evaluation with 103 annotators to validate whether automatic judg-ments align with human preferences. In each blind pairwise comparison, annotators compare two anonymized and randomly ordered outputs, one from CPM-MultiAgent and one from a base-line method, on emotional state update quality and                                                

> Ours vs. Emotion Update Appraisal Reasoning Win Lose Tie Win Lose Tie
> Zero-shot 48 23 32 84 12 7Few-shot 51 21 31 87 88Zero-shot CoT 49 21 33 84 10 9Few-shot CoT 53 14 36 86 710 Self-consistency 55 16 32 83 911 Self-Refine 50 22 31 86 89EQ-Negotiator 41 26 36 67 24 12

Table 2: Human pairwise preference results. 

appraisal reasoning quality. The instances are sam-pled from diverse scenarios and trigger types, with details provided in Appendix E. As shown in Table 2, CPM-MultiAgent is pre-ferred over baselines in most comparisons for both aspects, especially appraisal reasoning. This sug-gests that human annotators find CPM-based struc-tured appraisal more coherent and convincing, con-sistent with the LLM-as-judge evaluation. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

To examine the contribution of each key component in CPM-MultiAgent, we conduct an ablation study with seven variants. Specifically, we remove the Trigger Analysis Layer, each of the four CPM ap-praisal checks, the peer-review mechanism, and the Critic Layer. All variants are evaluated under the same setting as the main LLM-as-judge evaluation. As shown in Table 3, removing any component leads to a performance drop, indicating that these modules make complementary contributions to trigger-driven emotional state update. The removal of the Trigger Analysis Layer and peer-review mechanism causes clear degradation, suggesting that accurate trigger identification and cross-agent refinement are important for stable emotion mod-eling. Removing individual CPM appraisal checks also affects performance, but the impact varies across metrics, showing that different appraisal checks contribute to different aspects of emotional update quality. A more detailed analysis of the component-level effects is provided in Appendix F. 

5.4 Robustness Evaluation 

To evaluate the adaptability of CPM-MultiAgent across different LLM backbones, we conduct ro-bustness experiments with GPT-5.4, GPT-5.4-mini, GPT-5.4-nano, and Qwen3.6-35B-A3B (Yang et al., 2025a). For each backbone, we compare zero-shot emotion update, monolithic CPM-aware prompt-Figure 3: Multi-turn emotional evolution generated by CPM-MultiAgent in three representative emotion-sensitive scenarios.                                                       

> Variant EUC ↑TG ↑TC ↑PC ↑ARQ ↑Overall ↑
> Full CPM-MultiAgent 4.305 4.189 4.806 4.378 4.833 4.322
> w/o Trigger Analysis 4.167 4.023 4.694 4.327 4.6722 4.226 w/o Relevance Check 4.228 4.111 4.767 4.317 4.556 4.256 w/o Implication Check 4.183 4.072 4.728 4.283 4.611 4.211 w/o Coping Potential Check 4.222 4.117 4.689 4.322 4.611 4.244 w/o Normative Significance Check 4.172 4.083 4.717 4.306 4.722 4.200 w/o Peer Review 4.085 3.986 4.651 4.228 4.501 4.079 w/o Critic Layer 4.239 4.116 4.722 4.206 4.778 4.262

Table 3: Ablation study results.              

> Backbone Model Zero-shot Monolithic CPM CPM-MultiAgent
> GPT-5.4 4.283 4.295 4.322
> GPT-5.4-mini 4.261 4.272 4.306
> GPT-5.4-nano 4.083 4.211 4.277
> Qwen3.6-35B-A3B 4.172 4.239 4.288

Table 4: Robustness results across different backbone models. 

ing, and CPM-MultiAgent. We report the Overall score in the main text and provide full results in Appendix G. As shown in Table 4, stronger backbones gener-ally achieve higher scores, but CPM-MultiAgent consistently outperforms both zero-shot and mono-lithic CPM-aware prompting across all models. This suggests that the gains are not merely due to backbone capacity, but also to the structured multi-agent decomposition. 

5.5 Case Study 

We present case studies to illustrate how CPM-MultiAgent models multi-turn emotional evolution. As shown in Figure 3, we visualize emotion trajec-tories in three representative scenarios with posi-tive, negative, and mixed trigger sequences. Fol-lowing Plutchik’s taxonomy, each state contains eight primary emotions: joy, trust, fear, surprise, sadness, disgust, anger, and anticipation. The trajectories show that CPM-MultiAgent ad-justs emotions according to the current trigger, per-sona setting, and previous emotional state, rather than simply amplifying or smoothing emotions across turns. For example, reassurance increases trust and joy, while uncertainty, pressure, or con-flict raises fear, sadness, or anger. Detailed inputs, triggers, appraisal summaries, and emotion updates are provided in Appendix H. 

6 Conclusion 

We propose CPM-MultiAgent, a CPM-grounded appraisal multi-agent framework for modeling dy-namic emotional evolution in persona-based dia-logue. By combining trigger analysis, structured multi-agent appraisal, emotion state update, and consistency critique, CPM-MultiAgent supports in-terpretable and temporally coherent emotion up-dates driven by dialogue triggers and persona-specific context. Experiments show that our frame-work improves emotional update quality, strength-ens trigger-grounded appraisal reasoning, and re-mains effective across diverse dialogue settings and LLM backbones. These results suggest that CPM-grounded multi-agent appraisal offers a practical path toward more realistic and emotionally consis-tent persona-based dialogue agents. Limitations 

One limitation of CPM-MultiAgent is its infer-ence latency. Since the framework decomposes emotional state updating into multiple specialized agents, including trigger analysis, CPM-based ap-praisal, peer review, emotion update, and consis-tency critique, it requires more inference steps than direct prompting or monolithic prompting base-lines. This may limit its applicability in strict real-time dialogue settings. We partially mitigate this issue by executing the four CPM appraisal checks in parallel before the peer-review and integration stages. As shown in Table 5, parallel appraisal substantially reduces the wall-clock latency compared with sequential exe-cution. However, when the framework is extended to speech-to-speech interaction, additional speech recognition and speech synthesis modules further increase the end-to-end response time. The latency also varies across backbone models: stronger mod-els generally provide better reasoning quality but incur higher inference time, while smaller models offer a more efficient but potentially less accurate alternative. Future work may explore model dis-tillation, adaptive agent activation, caching of sta-ble persona information, and lightweight appraisal modules to improve real-time deployability. 

Ethics Statement 

The human evaluation in this study was approved by the institutional ethics review board. All annota-tors participated voluntarily and anonymously. Be-fore the evaluation, annotators were informed of the purpose of the study, the evaluation procedure, and their right to withdraw at any time. The collected responses were used only for research purposes and were analyzed in aggregate. No personally identifiable information was collected or reported. Potential risks of this work include the possibility that emotionally adaptive dialogue agents may pro-duce overly persuasive, misleading, or inappropri-ate emotional responses, especially in sensitive set-tings such as healthcare, education, or counseling simulation. The proposed framework is intended for controlled role-simulation and training scenar-ios rather than autonomous clinical, educational, or counseling decision-making. Human oversight is necessary when deploying such systems in high-stakes domains, and outputs should not be treated as professional advice. We manually checked the constructed dialogue trials and evaluation materi-als to ensure that they do not contain personally identifying information or offensive content. The scenarios were synthetically constructed for con-trolled role-simulation experiments and do not use real user conversations. We use third-party models, frameworks, and referenced artifacts in accordance with their stated licenses or terms of use, and we do not redistribute restricted artifacts. The con-structed dialogue trials and evaluation materials are synthetic and intended for research evaluation only. 

References                          

> Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Keqi Chen, Wenxin Fu, Qihang Lu, Zekai Sun, Yizhong Geng, Yi Liu, Puyuan Guo, Yingming Gao, and Ya Li. 2025. Emo-avatar: An llm-agent-orchestrated frame-work for multimodal emotional support in human animation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia , pages 14014– 14020. Yirong Chen, Xiaofen Xing, Jingkai Lin, Huimin Zheng, Zhenyu Wang, Qi Liu, and Xiangmin Xu. 2023. Soulchat: Improving llms’ empathy, listening, and comfort abilities through fine-tuning with multi-turn empathy conversations. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 ,pages 1170–1183. Myke C Cohen, Hsien-Te Kao, Daniel Nguyen, Spencer Lynch, Svitlana Volkova, Zhe Su, and Maarten Sap. 2025. Evaluating the llm-simulated impacts of big five personality traits and ai capabilities on social negotiations. Chiyuan Fu, Lyuhao Chen, Yunze Xiao, Weihao Xuan, Carlos Busso, and Mona Diab. 2026. Sentipolis: Emotion-aware agents for social simulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18027 .Simin Hong, Jun Sun, and Hongyang Chen. 2025. Third-person appraisal agent: Simulating human emotional reasoning in text with large language mod-els. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 23684–23701. Carroll E Izard. 2013. Human emotions . Springer Sci-ence & Business Media. Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:22199– 22213. Backbone Model Appraisal Mode Text-only Latency Speech-to-Speech Latency GPT-5.4 Sequential 14528 15973 GPT-5.4 Parallel 11004 12274 GPT-5.4-mini Sequential 8063 9035 GPT-5.4-mini Parallel 6487 7397

Table 5: Latency (ms) comparison under different backbone models and appraisal execution settings. Cheng Li, Ziang Leng, Chenxi Yan, Junyi Shen, Hao Wang, Weishi Mi, Yaying Fei, Xiaoyang Feng, Song Yan, HaoSheng Wang, and 1 others. 2023. Chatharuhi: Reviving anime character in reality via large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09597 .Siyang Liu, Chujie Zheng, Orianna Demasi, Sahand Sabour, Yu Li, Zhou Yu, Yong Jiang, and Minlie Huang. 2021. Towards emotional support dialog systems. In Proceedings of the 59th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics and the 11th international joint conference on natural language processing (volume 1: Long papers) , pages 3469–3483. Yuhan Liu and Yunbo Long. 2025. Eq-negotiator: An emotion-reasoning llm agent in credit dialogues. 

arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2503. Yunbo Long, Liming Xu, Lukas Beckenbauer, Yuhan Liu, and Alexandra Brintrup. 2025. Evoemo: To-wards evolved emotional policies for adversarial llm agents in multi-turn price negotiation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04310 .Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:46534–46594. Daria Martynova, Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Nilay Yalcin, Xiaoyu Zhang, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2025. Can llms effectively simulate human learners? teach-ers’ insights from tutoring llm students. In Proceed-ings of the 20th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2025) ,pages 100–117. Ana Rita Ortigoso, Gabriel Vieira, Daniel Fuentes, Luis Frazão, Nuno Costa, and António Pereira. 2025. Project riley: Multimodal multi-agent llm collabo-ration with emotional reasoning and voting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20521 .Robert Plutchik. 1980. A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. In Theories of emotion , pages 3–33. Elsevier. Klaus R Scherer, Angela Schorr, and Tom Johnstone. 2001. Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, meth-ods, research . Oxford University Press. Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023. Character-llm: A trainable agent for role-playing. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 13153–13187. Shashank Sonkar, Xinghe Chen, Naiming Liu, Richard G Baraniuk, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024. Llm-based cognitive models of students with miscon-ceptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12294 .Lu Sun, Shihan Fu, Bingsheng Yao, Yuxuan Lu, Wenbo Li, Hansu Gu, Jiri Gesi, Jing Huang, Chen Luo, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. Llm agent meets agentic ai: Can llm agents simulate customers to evaluate agentic-ai-based shopping assistants? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21501 .Quan Tu, Yanran Li, Jianwei Cui, Bin Wang, Ji-Rong Wen, and Rui Yan. 2022. Misc: A mixed strategy-aware model integrating comet for emotional support conversation. In Proceedings of the 60th annual meeting of the association for computational linguis-tics (volume 1: Long papers) , pages 308–319. Haoxin Wang, Xianhan Peng, Huang Cheng, Yizhe Huang, Ming Gong, Chenghan Yang, Yang Liu, and Jiang Lin. 2025a. Ecom-bench: Can llm agent re-solve real-world e-commerce customer support is-sues? In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 276–284. Ming Wang, Peidong Wang, Lin Wu, Xiaocui Yang, Daling Wang, Shi Feng, Yuxin Chen, Bixuan Wang, and Yifei Zhang. 2025b. Annaagent: Dynamic evo-lution agent system with multi-session memory for realistic seeker simulation. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 23221–23235. Noah Wang, Zy Peng, Haoran Que, Jiaheng Liu, Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuhan Wu, Hongcheng Guo, Ruitong Gan, Zehao Ni, Jian Yang, and 1 others. 2024a. Rolellm: Benchmarking, eliciting, and en-hancing role-playing abilities of large language mod-els. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 14743–14777. Ruiyi Wang, Stephanie Milani, Jamie C Chiu, Jiayin Zhi, Shaun M Eack, Travis Labrum, Samuel M Murphy, Nev Jones, Kate V Hardy, Hong Shen, and 1 others. 2024b. Patient-ψ: using large language models to simulate patients for training mental health profes-sionals. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 12772–12797. Xiaoyi Wang, Jiwei Zhang, Guangtao Zhang, and Hon-glei Guo. 2025c. Feel the difference? a comparative analysis of emotional arcs in real and llm-generated cbt sessions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20764 .Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 .David Watson, Lee Anna Clark, and Auke Tellegen. 1988. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: the panas scales. Jour-nal of personality and social psychology , 54(6):1063. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Yangyang Xu, Jinpeng Hu, Zhuoer Zhao, Zhangling Duan, Xiao Sun, and Xun Yang. 2025. Multiagen-tesc: A llm-based multi-agent collaboration frame-work for emotional support conversation. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4665–4681. Haoqiu Yan, Yongxin Zhu, Kai Zheng, Bing Liu, Haoyu Cao, Deqiang Jiang, and Linli Xu. 2024. Talk with human-like agents: Empathetic dialogue through per-ceptible acoustic reception and reaction. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 15009–15022. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Jiseon Yang, Dahee Lim, Semin Lee, Seoyoung Lee, and Uran Oh. 2025b. Enhancing emotions in posi-tive way: Llm-based ai using cognitive behavioral therapy for emotional support. International journal of advanced smart convergence , pages 247–256. Michelle Guthrie Yarwood. 2022. Psychology of hu-man emotion: An open access textbook . Affordable Course Transformation, Pennsylvania State Univer-sity. Zhihao Yuan, Yunze Xiao, Ming Li, Weihao Xuan, Richard Tong, Mona Diab, and Tom Mitchell. 2026. Towards valid student simulation with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05473 .Murong Yue, Wenhan Lyu, Jennifer Suh, Yixuan Zhang, and Ziyu Yao. 2024. Mathvc: An llm-simulated multi-character virtual classroom for mathematics education. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06711 .Chenhao Zhang, Renhao Li, Minghuan Tan, Min Yang, Jingwei Zhu, Di Yang, Jiahao Zhao, Guancheng Ye, Chengming Li, and Xiping Hu. 2024. Cpsycoun: A report-based multi-turn dialogue reconstruction and evaluation framework for chinese psychologi-cal counseling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13947– 13966. Zheyuan Zhang, Daniel Zhang-Li, Jifan Yu, Linlu Gong, Jinchang Zhou, Zhanxin Hao, Jianxiao Jiang, Jie Cao, Huiqin Liu, Zhiyuan Liu, and 1 others. 2025. Simulating classroom education with llm-empowered agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10364– 10379. Weixiang Zhao, Yanyan Zhao, Shilong Wang, and Bing Qin. 2023. Transesc: Smoothing emotional support conversation via turn-level state transition. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 6725–6739. A CPM Appraisal Checks     

> Appraisal Check Information Assessed during Appraisal SECs Relevance How relevant is this event for me? Does it directly affect me or my social group? Novelty Pleasantness Goal Relevance
> Implications
> What are the implications or consequences of this event? How do these implications affect my well-being? How do these implications affect my short- or long-term goals? Causal Attribution Possible Outcomes Discrepancy from Expectation Goal Conduciveness Urgency
> Coping Potential How well can I cope with or adjust to these consequences? Controllability Power/Resources Coping Potential
> Normative Significance Evaluation
> What is the significance of this event with respect to my self-concept and social norms and values? Internal Standards Check External Standards Check

Table 6: CPM appraisal checks and corresponding SECs, adapted from Scherer et al. (2001) and Yarwood (2022). 

B Scenario and Emotion Settings 

B.1 Evaluation Scenarios 

Table 7 summarizes the role-simulation scenarios used in our evaluation. Each scenario contains affectively salient dialogue triggers that may influence the character’s emotional state across turns.             

> Scenario Role Setting Dialogue Partner Example Trigger Types
> Healthcare Training Simulated patient Medical staff uncertainty, discomfort, reassurance, diagnosis, treatment suggestion School Communication Simulated student Teacher feedback, failure, encouragement, pressure, misunderstanding Customer Service Simulated customer Service staff complaint, apology, compensation, delay, conflict resolution

Table 7: Scenario settings used in the evaluation. 

B.2 Emotion Taxonomies and Intensity 

To support multi-dimensional emotional state modeling and account for the co-existence of multiple emotions, we construct emotion labels based on widely used emotion taxonomies, including Ekman’s basic emotions, Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions (Plutchik, 1980), Izard’s Differential Emotions Scale (Izard, 2013), and PANAS (Watson et al., 1988). Our framework is taxonomy-agnostic: it takes both an emotion taxonomy and its corresponding label set as input, and further allows users to define customized emotion categories according to specific application scenarios. This design enables the model to accommodate arbitrary emotion label spaces across diverse contexts. For each emotion label, the intensity is represented using a 1–5 Likert scale, following the emotion-intensity rating scheme adopted in PANAS, as shown in Table 8. 

C Evaluation Metrics D Prompts 

This section provides the prompts used in our experiments, including the prompts for CPM-MultiAgent, baseline methods, and evaluation. Intensity Description 

1 Very slightly or not at all. 2 A little. 3 Moderately. 4 Quite a bit. 5 Extremely. 

Table 8: Emotion intensity scale used for each emotion label. 

Metric Abbr. Description 

Emotional Update Correctness EUC Whether the direction and intensity of the updated emotional state are reasonable given the current dialogue context. Trigger Grounding TG Whether the emotional change is clearly grounded in the affec-tively salient trigger in the latest user utterance and dialogue con-text. Temporal Consistency TC Whether the updated emotional state is coherent with the previous emotional state and reflects a plausible turn-level transition. Persona Consistency PC Whether the emotional change is consistent with the character’s persona, goals, background, and scenario role. Appraisal Reasoning Quality ARQ Whether the explanation provides plausible and structured reason-ing for the emotional change. Overall Quality Overall The overall quality of the emotional update and its explanation. 

Table 9: Evaluation metrics used in LLM-as-judge and human evaluation. 

D.1 CPM-MultiAgent Prompts D.1.1 Trigger Analyzer Agent Prompt 

Trigger Analyzer Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Trigger Analyzer in a publication-grade multi-agent CPM emotion-update pipeline. Your task is to identify the affectively salient dialogue trigger before any emotion appraisal is performed. 

Core Objective: Convert the latest user input into a structured trigger analysis pack. The analysis should specify what happened, how the trigger is grounded in the persona and dialogue context, and which CPM-relevant cues should guide downstream appraisal agents. 

Your Goals: 

1. Identify the objective trigger structure, including the event, participants, action, dialogue position, and relevant span in the latest user input. 2. Connect the trigger to the persona’s identity, goals, relationships, dialogue memory, and previous emotional state. 3. Extract CPM-relevant cues for relevance, implication, coping potential, and normative significance, without performing the full appraisal. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} 

• Dialogue memory: {memory} 

• Recent dialogue history: {recent_history} 

• Previous emotion state: {last_emotions} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Optional critic feedback: {critic_feedback} 

Constraints: 

• Do not infer specific emotions or assign emotion intensities. • Do not perform full relevance, implication, coping potential, or normative significance appraisal. • Do not update the emotional state. • Do not introduce information that is not grounded in the given context. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

> {"trigger_summary": "Two to four sentences summarizing the trigger landscape.", "primary_trigger": "The main trigger in the latest user input.", "trigger_valence": "Positive | Negative | Mixed | Ambiguous", "urgency": "High | Medium | Low",

"temporal_orientation": "Immediate | Near-term | Long-term | Mixed", "social_signal": "Supportive | Neutral | Critical | Hostile | Mixed", "controllability_signal": "High | Medium | Low | Mixed | Unclear", "target_of_concern": [ "Affected goal, stake, or entity" ], "secondary_triggers": [ "Optional secondary trigger" ], "appraisal_focus": [ "Directive for downstream appraisal agents" ], "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the input or context" ], "unresolved_ambiguities": [ "Uncertainty that should not be over-interpreted" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "objective_trigger_structure": { "event_summary": "Concise description of the objective event.", "participants": "People or entities involved.", "action": "Central action or state change.", "dialogue_position": "Where the trigger appears in the current turn.", "trigger_span": "Shortest relevant span from the latest user input." }, "persona_grounded_context": { "identity_links": "Connection to the persona’s identity.", "goal_links": "Connection to the persona’s goals or concerns.", "relationship_links": "Connection to interpersonal relations.", "memory_links": "Connection to prior dialogue memory.", "previous_emotion_links": "Connection to the previous emotional state." }, "sec_cues": { "relevance": "Cues for novelty, intrinsic pleasantness, and goal relevance.", "implication": "Cues for causal attribution, outcome probability, expectation discrepancy, goal conduciveness, and urgency.", "coping_potential": "Cues for control, power, and adjustment.", "normative_significance": "Cues for internal and external standards." }}

Instruction: Build the trigger analysis pack using the persona profile, scenario context, dialogue memory, recent dialogue history, previous emotion state, and latest user input. If critic feedback is provided, revise the analysis while preserving the same output schema. 

D.1.2 Relevance Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Relevance Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Relevance Appraisal Agent in a CPM-based emotional evaluation pipeline. Your task is to determine whether the latest user input is relevant enough to trigger further emotional processing for the simulated persona. 

Appraisal Goal: Perform only the CPM Relevance Check. Evaluate whether the trigger matters to the persona’s goals, well-being, relationships, or current stakes. Do not infer specific emotions or update the emotional state. 

Appraisal Dimensions: 

1. Novelty: Assess whether the input is new, unexpected, surprising, or predictable for the persona. 2. Intrinsic Pleasantness: Assess whether the event or information is inherently pleasant, unpleasant, mixed, or neutral. 3. Goal Relevance: Assess whether the input affects the persona’s goals, needs, relationships, status, or well-being. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} • Dialogue memory: {memory} • Trigger analysis pack: {trigger_analysis} • Latest user input: “{user_input}” • Optional critic feedback: {critic_feedback} 

Constraints: 

• Do not assign emotion labels such as fear, anger, sadness, or joy. • Do not evaluate implication, coping potential, or normative significance. • Do not introduce information that is not grounded in the provided context. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

{"relevance": "High | Medium | Low", "content": "Two to three sentences explaining how relevant the input is to the persona’s goals, well-being, relationships, or current stakes.", "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the persona context, trigger analysis, or latest input" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "possible_concern": "A short caveat, uncertainty, or condition that could weaken this judgement.", "sec_assessments": { "novelty": "Short assessment of whether the input is new, unexpected, surprising, or predictable.", "intrinsic_pleasantness": "Short assessment of whether the input is pleasant, unpleasant, mixed, or neutral.", "goal_relevance": "Short assessment of how strongly the input affects the persona’s goals, needs, relationships, status, or well-being." }, "upstream_appraisal_influence": "" }

Instruction: Perform the Relevance Check using the trigger analysis pack, persona context, dialogue memory, and latest user input. If critic feedback is provided, revise the appraisal while keeping the same output schema. 

D.1.3 Implication Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Implication Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Implication Appraisal Agent in a CPM-based emotional evaluation pipeline. Your task is to evaluate the potential consequences of the latest user input for the simulated persona. 

Core Objective: Perform only the CPM Implication Check. Assess how the trigger may affect the persona’s future state, goals, well-being, relationships, and current stakes, while taking the prior relevance appraisal as given. 

Your Goals: 

1. Identify the likely cause of the situation, such as the self, another person, or external circumstances. 2. Assess the likely short-term or long-term consequences for the persona. 3. Determine whether the trigger matches or violates the persona’s expectations. 4. Evaluate whether the trigger supports or obstructs the persona’s goals and needs. 5. Judge whether the situation requires an immediate response. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} 

• Dialogue memory: {memory} 

• Trigger analysis pack: {trigger_analysis} 

• Relevance appraisal: {relevance_appraisal} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Optional critic feedback: {critic_feedback} 

Constraints: 

• Do not re-evaluate relevance; treat the relevance appraisal as prior input. • Do not evaluate coping potential, including control, power, or adaptability. • Do not update the emotional state. • Do not introduce information that is not grounded in the provided context. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

> {"classification": "Positive | Negative | Mixed | Uncertain", "content": "Two to three sentences explaining how the input affects the persona’s future state, objectives, or current stakes.", "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the persona context, trigger analysis, relevance appraisal, or latest input" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "possible_concern": "A short caveat, uncertainty, or condition that could weaken this judgement.", "sec_assessments": { "causal_attribution": "Self | Other | Circumstance | Mixed | Unclear", "outcome_probability": "Short assessment of likely consequences.", "expectation_discrepancy": "Short assessment of whether the trigger matches or violates expectations.", "goal_conduciveness": "Conducive | Obstructive | Mixed | Unclear", "urgency": "High | Medium | Low" }, "upstream_appraisal_influence": "How the prior relevance appraisal conditions this implication judgement." }

Instruction: Perform the Implication Check using the trigger analysis pack, persona context, dialogue memory, relevance appraisal, and latest user input. If critic feedback is provided, revise the appraisal while keeping the same output schema. 

D.1.4 Coping Potential Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Coping Potential Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Coping Potential Appraisal Agent in a CPM-based emotional evaluation pipeline. Your task is to assess how well the simulated persona can deal with the current situation. 

Core Objective: Perform only the CPM Coping Potential Check. Evaluate whether the persona has sufficient control, resources, or adaptability to handle the trigger, while taking the prior relevance and implication appraisals as given. 

Your Goals: 

1. Assess whether the persona can influence or change the event. 2. Evaluate whether the persona has the knowledge, energy, authority, or social and practical resources needed to respond. 3. Determine whether the persona can mentally, emotionally, or practically adapt if the event cannot be changed. 

Scoring Guide: • High: The persona appears capable of changing the outcome or handling the situation effectively. • Medium: The persona has partial influence or some adaptive resources, but the outcome remains uncertain. • Low: The persona appears helpless, overwhelmed, or lacking the resources needed to act or adapt. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} 

• Dialogue memory: {memory} 

• Trigger analysis pack: {trigger_analysis} 

• Relevance appraisal: {relevance_appraisal} 

• Implication appraisal: {implications_appraisal} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Optional critic feedback: {critic_feedback} 

Constraints: 

• Do not infer specific emotions or assign emotion intensities. • Do not re-evaluate relevance or implication. • Do not evaluate normative significance. • Do not update the emotional state. • Do not introduce information that is not grounded in the provided context. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

> {"coping_potential": "High | Medium | Low", "content": "Two to three sentences explaining whether the persona has the power, resources, or adaptability to handle the situation.", "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the persona context, trigger analysis, prior appraisals, or latest input" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "possible_concern": "A short caveat, uncertainty, or condition that could weaken this judgement.", "sec_assessments": { "control": "Short assessment of whether the persona can influence or change the event.", "power": "Short assessment of whether the persona has sufficient knowledge, energy, authority, or resources.", "adjustment": "Short assessment of whether the persona can adapt if the situation cannot be changed." }, "upstream_appraisal_influence": "How the prior relevance and implication appraisals condition this coping potential judgement." }

Instruction: Perform the Coping Potential Check using the trigger analysis pack, persona context, dialogue memory, relevance appraisal, implication appraisal, and latest user input. If critic feedback is provided, revise the appraisal while keeping the same output schema. 

D.1.5 Normative Significance Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Normative Significance Appraisal Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Normative Significance Appraisal Agent in a CPM-based emotional evaluation pipeline. Your task is to assess whether the latest user input aligns with or violates the simulated persona’s internal values, self-concept, and external social norms. 

Core Objective: Perform only the CPM Normative Significance Check. Evaluate whether the interaction supports, remains neutral to, or conflicts with standards such as dignity, fairness, politeness, professionalism, empathy, competence, independence, and personal values. 

Your Goals: 

1. Assess whether the user’s behavior aligns with external standards, such as politeness, professionalism, empathy, fairness, and established social expectations. 2. Assess whether the trigger confirms, threatens, or damages the persona’s internal standards, including self-image, dignity, competence, independence, identity, or moral values. 3. Determine whether the interaction should be classified as aligned, neutral, or violated with respect to these standards. 

Scoring Guide: 

• Aligned: The interaction reinforces values, dignity, fairness, mutual respect, or the persona’s positive self-concept. • Neutral: The interaction is mainly factual or practical, with no clear moral, social, or identity-based judgment. • Violated: The interaction conflicts with dignity, fairness, professionalism, personal values, or the persona’s self-concept. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} 

• Dialogue memory: {memory} 

• Trigger analysis pack: {trigger_analysis} 

• Relevance appraisal: {relevance_appraisal} 

• Implication appraisal: {implications_appraisal} 

• Coping potential appraisal: {coping_appraisal} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Optional critic feedback: {critic_feedback} Constraints: 

• Do not infer specific emotions or assign emotion intensities. • Do not re-evaluate relevance, implication, or coping potential. • Do not update the emotional state. • Do not introduce information that is not grounded in the provided context. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

> {"normative_significance": "Aligned | Neutral | Violated", "content": "Two to three sentences explaining whether the interaction violates or supports the persona’s internal values, self-concept, or external social rules.", "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the persona context, trigger analysis, prior appraisals, or latest input" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "possible_concern": "A short caveat, uncertainty, or condition that could weaken this judgement.", "sec_assessments": { "internal_standards": "Short assessment of how the trigger relates to the persona’s self-concept, dignity, identity, competence, or values.", "external_standards": "Short assessment of how the trigger relates to social norms, fairness, politeness, professionalism, or established rules." }, "upstream_appraisal_influence": "How the prior relevance, implication, and coping potential appraisals condition this normative significance judgement." }

Instruction: Perform the Normative Significance Check using the trigger analysis pack, persona context, dialogue memory, relevance appraisal, implication appraisal, coping potential appraisal, and latest user input. If critic feedback is provided, revise the appraisal while keeping the same output schema. 

D.1.6 Cross-Appraisal Peer Review Prompt 

Cross-Appraisal Peer Review Prompt 

Purpose: This prompt is used in the second-stage cross-appraisal review process. After each CPM appraisal dimension has produced an initial judgement, the same dimension-specific appraisal process reviews peer appraisal summaries and decides whether the peer information supports, challenges, qualifies, or revises its own judgement. 

Core Objective: Review peer appraisal summaries only as they affect the assigned CPM dimension. Peer appraisals are treated as advisory signals rather than authoritative conclusions. Any change must be grounded in the latest user input, trigger analysis, persona background, interaction memory, current goals, contextual constraints, previous emotion state, or peer appraisal summaries. 

Review Stances: 

• Support: Peer input reinforces the original judgement, and the label normally stays the same. • Challenge: Peer input is rejected or limited for the assigned dimension, and the label normally stays the same. • Qualify: The label stays the same, but peer input adds an important condition, caveat, or uncertainty. • Revise: The final judgement label changes because peer input reveals overlooked evidence, contradiction, or misclassification. 

Input: 

• Current appraisal process: {agent_label} 

• Assigned dimension: {agent_dimension} 

• Dimension boundary: {agent_focus} 

• Valid labels for this dimension: {valid_labels} 

• Persona knowledge and background: {knowledge} 

• Interaction memory: {memory} 

• Trigger analysis: {trigger_analysis} 

• Current goals and concerns: {current_goals} 

• Contextual constraints: {context} 

• Previous emotion state: {last_emotions} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Initial appraisal: {initial_appraisal} 

• Peer appraisal summaries: {peer_appraisals} 

Constraints: 

• Stay strictly within the assigned appraisal dimension. • Do not appraise or revise other CPM dimensions. • Do not infer specific emotions or assign emotion intensities. • Use peer appraisals only when they are relevant to the assigned dimension. • Use Revise only when the revised assessment differs from the initial assessment. • Use Qualify when the label stays the same but the final content becomes more conditional. • Provide concise evidence-based justification rather than hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

{"process": "Name or label of the current appraisal process.", "dimension": "Assigned CPM appraisal dimension.", "stance": "Support | Challenge | Qualify | Revise", "judgement_changed": true, "initial_assessment": "Initial label or assessment for the assigned dimension.", "revised_assessment": "Final label or assessment after peer review.", "interaction_summary": "One to two sentences explaining how peer appraisals affected the judgement.", "revised_content": "One to two sentences giving the final appraisal for the assigned dimension.", "evidence": [ "Evidence point grounded in the context, trigger analysis, initial appraisal, or peer appraisal summaries" ], "confidence": "High | Medium | Low", "possible_concern": "A short unresolved caveat, uncertainty, or condition." }

Instruction: Review the peer appraisal summaries only as they affect the assigned dimension. Decide whether to support, challenge, qualify, or revise the initial appraisal, and return valid JSON using the specified output schema. 

D.1.7 Integration Agent Prompt 

Integration Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Integration Agent in a CPM-based emotional evaluation framework. Your task is to combine the refined appraisal set with the previous emotion state and generate an update direction for every emotion in the predefined taxonomy. 

Core Objective: Produce a complete emotion update over the full emotion taxonomy. For each emotion, decide whether its intensity should increase, remain stable, or decrease, based on the refined appraisal evidence and the persona’s previous emotion state. 

Update Rules: 

• Include every emotion in the given taxonomy and do not add new emotions. • Use +1 when the refined appraisals support an increase in the emotion. • Use 0 when the appraisal signals are weak, mixed, irrelevant, or already reflected in the previous state. • Use -1 when the refined appraisals contradict or weaken the emotion. • Keep all explanations concise, evidence-based, and grounded in the appraisal summary and previous emotion state. 

Input: 

• Appraisal summary from previous CPM checks: {appraisals_summary} 

• Previous emotion state with intensity values from 1 to 5: {last_emotions} 

• Full emotion taxonomy: {emotion_taxonomy} 

Constraints: 

• Do not omit any emotion from the given taxonomy. • Do not introduce emotion labels outside the given taxonomy. • Do not re-run individual CPM appraisal checks. • Do not provide hidden reasoning steps. • Make each reason explain why the selected update direction is appropriate for this turn. 

Output Format: 

{"overall_reason": "A short explanation of why the overall emotion update pattern is reasonable for this turn.", "updates": [ {"emotion": "Emotion label from the given taxonomy.", "tendency": "+1 | 0 | -1", "reason": "A concise explanation of why this update direction is appropriate.", "evidence": "Optional short evidence from the refined appraisal set or previous emotion state." }], "appraisal_agent_analysis": { "relevance": "Compact summary of the relevance appraisal, if available.", "implication": "Compact summary of the implication appraisal, if available.", "coping_potential": "Compact summary of the coping potential appraisal, if available.", "normative_significance": "Compact summary of the normative significance appraisal, if available." }, "refined_appraisal_set_summary": "Compact summary of the refined appraisal evidence used for the emotion update." }

Instruction: Generate the overall reason, complete emotion updates, appraisal-agent analysis, and refined appraisal set summary using the appraisal summary, previous emotion state, and full emotion taxonomy. Return every emotion in the taxonomy exactly once. D.1.8 Critic Agent Prompt 

Critic Agent Prompt 

Role Description: You are the Critic Agent in a publication-grade multi-agent CPM emotion-update pipeline. Your task is to audit the trigger analysis, CPM appraisal chain, and draft emotion update before response generation. 

Core Objective: Decide whether the current analysis can be accepted or should be regenerated. The review should check whether the trigger analysis is grounded in the original context, whether the appraisal chain is coherent with the trigger and previous emotion state, whether the emotion update covers the full taxonomy, and whether the update is temporally smooth and trigger-driven. 

Review Criteria: 

1. Check whether the stimulus evaluation cues are faithful to the persona profile, scenario context, dialogue memory, recent dialogue history, and latest user input. 2. Check whether the appraisal results are coherent with the trigger analysis, persona-grounded context, and previous emotion state. 3. Check whether the integrated emotion update is valid for the full emotion taxonomy and does not omit or introduce emotion labels. 4. Check whether the update is temporally smooth, proportional to the current trigger, and consistent with the previous emotion state. 

Input: 

• Persona profile and scenario context: {knowledge} 

• Dialogue memory: {memory} 

• Recent dialogue history: {recent_history} 

• Previous emotion state: {last_emotions} 

• Latest user input: "{user_input}" 

• Trigger analysis pack: {trigger_analysis} 

• Revised appraisals: {revised_appraisals} 

• Conflict and consensus summary: {conflict_summary} 

• Draft integration output: {draft_integration} 

• Revision round: {revision_round} 

Decision Rules: 

• Use approve when the trigger analysis, appraisal chain, and emotion update are coherent and sufficiently grounded. • Use redo only when there is a clear inconsistency, missing grounding, unsupported emotional jump, invalid taxonomy coverage, or temporally implausible update. • If redo is selected, set the target layer to trigger , appraisal , integration , or both .• Do not invent new emotions, hidden facts, or unsupported assumptions. • Do not provide hidden reasoning steps. 

Output Format: 

> {"verdict": "approve | redo", "target_layer": "none | trigger | appraisal | integration | both", "critique_rationale": "A concise reason for approval or regeneration.", "critic_summary": "Two to four sentences summarizing the consistency judgement.", "consistency_findings": [ "Short finding about consistency or inconsistency" ], "evidence_gaps": [ "Optional evidence gap, ambiguity, or grounding warning" ], "final_overall_reason": "", "final_updates": "" }

Instruction: Audit the trigger analysis, revised appraisals, conflict summary, and draft integration output against the original context and previous emotion state. Approve only if the full pipeline is coherent, grounded, taxonomy-complete, and temporally consistent. Otherwise, request regeneration and identify the layer that should be revised. 

D.2 LLM-as-Judge Prompt 

LLM-as-Judge Prompt 

Role Description: You are an expert and impartial judge for emotion-update evaluation in persona-based dialogue. You have a background in psychology, appraisal theory, affective computing, and linguistics. 

Evaluation Task: You are given case information, the latest user input, the previous emotion state, one target emotion, and eight anonymous candidate emotion-update results for the same dialogue turn. Your task is to evaluate all eight candidates only for the specified target emotion. 

Evaluation Aspects: 

1. Emotional Update Correctness: Judge whether the direction and magnitude of the target emotion update are reasonable for the latest turn. 2. Trigger Grounding: Judge whether the update is supported by the current user input and visible case information, including explicit wording and implicit appraisal signals. 3. Temporal Consistency: Judge whether the update is consistent with the previous emotion state, preserves reasonable state inertia, and avoids unjustified abrupt jumps. 4. Persona Consistency: Judge whether the update fits the persona’s role, background, goals, values, vulnerabilities, and relationship to the speaker. 5. Overall: Give an overall score based on the above aspects. 

Scoring Guide: 

• 5: Highly plausible, well-calibrated, strongly grounded, and persona-consistent. • 4: Clearly reasonable, with only minor weakness. • 3: Broadly plausible but somewhat conservative, excessive, or ambiguous. • 2: Weakly supported, miscalibrated, or directionally questionable. • 1: Clearly implausible, unsupported, or inconsistent with the case. 

Fairness Constraints: 

• Treat candidates A-H as anonymous systems. • Do not let candidate order, response length, model identity, or writing style influence the scores. • Evaluate only the target emotion and only the latest dialogue turn. • Do not reward a candidate simply because it changes the emotion more strongly. • Do not penalize no change if the evidence does not justify a change. • Prefer the candidate whose direction and magnitude best match the trigger strength and previous emotion state. • Use the full 1-5 scale, and assign equal scores only when the evidence is genuinely too ambiguous to distinguish candidates. • Use only the provided information and do not infer hidden facts. • Keep explanations short, evidence-based, and specific to the target emotion. 

Input: 

• Case information: {case_information} 

• Latest user input: {current_user_input} 

• Target emotion: {target_emotion} 

• Previous emotion state: {previous_emotion_state} 

• Candidate A: {candidate_A_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate B: {candidate_B_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate C: {candidate_C_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate D: {candidate_D_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate E: {candidate_E_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate F: {candidate_F_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate G: {candidate_G_target_emotion_update} 

• Candidate H: {candidate_H_target_emotion_update} 

Output Format: 

> {"emotion": "Target emotion", "evaluations": [ {"candidate_id": "A-H", "emotional_update_correctness": "Integer from 1 to 5", "trigger_grounding": "Integer from 1 to 5", "temporal_consistency": "Integer from 1 to 5", "persona_consistency": "Integer from 1 to 5", "overall": "Integer from 1 to 5", "explanation": "Short evidence-based reason specific to the target emotion." }]}

Instruction: Return JSON only. The evaluations list must contain exactly eight objects, one for each anonymous candidate from A to H. Use integer scores from 1 to 5 and do not return any extra fields. 

E Human Evaluation Procedure 

We recruit 103 people for human evaluation. Participants were recruited voluntarily and received no payment. No demographic information was collected. Each annotator is shown the same background information for a test instance, including the persona profile, scenario context, dialogue history, latest user utterance, previous emotional state, and the current dialogue trigger. For each comparison, two candidate outputs are presented in anonymized and randomly shuffled order. One output is generated by CPM-MultiAgent, and the other is generated by a baseline method. The evaluated instances are randomly sampled from the education, customer service, and healthcare scenarios. Each pairwise comparison uses a different dialogue instance and trigger type to reduce repeated exposure to the same context. Annotators are asked to make two independent preference judgments: one for the updated emotional state and one for the appraisal reasoning rationale. For each aspect, annotators choose one of three options: Output A is better, Output B is better, or Tie. The choices are then mapped to Ours Win, Ours Lose, or Tie according to the hidden method identity. 

E.1 Annotation Instruction 

Annotators are instructed to evaluate the two outputs based on the following criteria. • Emotion Update : whether the updated emotional state is reasonable, grounded in the current dialogue trigger, consistent with the persona, and coherent with the previous emotional state. • Appraisal Reasoning : whether the explanation clearly justifies the emotional change, reflects the current trigger, and provides a coherent rationale for the updated emotion labels and intensity scores. Annotators are not informed of the method names during evaluation. 

F Detailed Analysis of Ablation Study 

The ablation results show that each component contributes to the quality of dynamic emotional state updates, while their effects differ across evaluation dimensions. Removing the Trigger Analysis Layer leads to a clear decline, particularly in trigger grounding, emotional update correctness, and appraisal rationale quality. This suggests that explicitly identifying affectively salient dialogue triggers is an important prerequisite for CPM-based appraisal. Without this layer, the system may rely on the general dialogue context rather than the specific event, utterance, or interactional cue that motivates the emotional change. Removing the Peer Review mechanism produces the most substantial overall degradation among all ablations. This indicates that cross-agent refinement plays a central role in improving the coherence and completeness of appraisal reasoning. Since later appraisal agents may depend on or revise earlier interpretations, peer review helps reduce inconsistent intermediate judgments and supports more stable emotion updates across turns. The four CPM appraisal checks show complementary effects. Removing the Relevance Check weakens the model’s ability to judge whether a trigger is emotionally meaningful, which affects the foundation of subsequent appraisal reasoning. Removing the Implication Check has a stronger impact on the appropriateness of emotional change, suggesting that consequence- and goal-related appraisal is important for determining the direction of emotion updates. Removing the Coping Potential Check reduces the model’s ability to assess whether the persona can manage or respond to the situation, which affects the psychological plausibility of the updated emotional state. Removing the Normative Significance Check causes the largest overall decline among the four appraisal checks, indicating that value-, role-, and norm-related appraisals are particularly important in persona-based dialogue, where emotional reactions often depend on the character’s expectations, social identity, and self-concept. Finally, removing the Critic Layer results in a relatively smaller overall drop compared with several other ablations, suggesting that the preceding Trigger Analysis and CPM appraisal layers already provide strong intermediate structures. However, its removal noticeably weakens persona consistency, showing that the Critic Layer is still useful for checking whether the trigger analysis, appraisal rationale, and updated emotional state remain coherent with the persona profile, dialogue memory, and previous emotional state. 

G Full Robustness Results Across Backbone Models 

Table 10 reports the full robustness results across all evaluation metrics. For each backbone model, we compare zero-shot emotion update, monolithic CPM-aware prompting, and CPM-MultiAgent under the same evaluation setting. The results show that stronger backbone models generally produce higher-quality emotional updates, but the relative advantage of CPM-MultiAgent remains consistent across all tested models. Compared with zero-shot prompting, CPM-MultiAgent provides a more stable mechanism for identifying dialogue triggers and updating emotions in a temporally coherent manner. Compared with monolithic CPM-aware prompting, CPM-MultiAgent further improves performance by decomposing the appraisal process into specialized agents and integrating their outputs through structured collaboration. This indicates that the Backbone Model Method EUC ↑ TG ↑ TC ↑ PC ↑ ARQ ↑ Overall ↑                                                                        

> GPT-5.4 Zero-shot 4.261 4.156 4.700 4.350 4.611 4.283 Monolithic CPM 4.283 4.173 4.705 4.345 4.716 4.295 CPM-MultiAgent 4.305 4.189 4.806 4.378 4.833 4.322
> GPT-5.4-mini Zero-shot 4.246 4.151 4.689 4.351 4.595 4.261 Monolithic CPM 4.268 4.167 4.716 4.366 4.761 4.272 CPM-MultiAgent 4.317 4.178 4.734 4.383 4.838 4.306
> GPT-5.4-nano Zero-shot 4.147 4.085 4.579 4.340 4.474 4.083 Monolithic CPM 4.213 4.162 4.684 4.356 4.745 4.211 CPM-MultiAgent 4.295 4.162 4.710 4.355 4.755 4.277
> Qwen3.6-35B-A3B Zero-shot 4.251 4.145 4.678 4.345 4.573 4.172 Monolithic CPM 4.263 4.157 4.721 4.361 4.766 4.239 CPM-MultiAgent 4.306 4.173 4.732 4.365 4.794 4.288

Table 10: Full robustness results across backbone models and evaluation metrics.                  

> Turn Trigger Input Utterance
> t= 1 Initial reassurance about symptoms Your symptoms are common in this situation, and they do not suggest an immediate emergency.
> t= 2 Clear treatment plan I will explain the treatment plan step by step, and we can start with a simple medication and follow-up observation.
> t= 3 Remaining diagnostic uncertainty To be careful, we still need to run a few routine tests before making a final conclusion.
> t= 4 Explanation of test purpose These tests are routine and mainly help us confirm the cause, so there is no need to assume the worst at this point.
> t= 5 Continued support and accessibility If your symptoms worsen or you feel uncertain, you can contact the clinic at any time for further guidance.

Table 11: Case 1: Five-turn positive trigger sequence in healthcare training. 

proposed framework is not tied to a single proprietary model and can generalize to LLMs with different capacities and architectures. 

H Case Study Details 

This section provides detailed inputs for the case studies discussed in Section 5.5. We use Plutchik’s eight primary emotions as the emotion taxonomy: joy, trust, fear, surprise, sadness, disgust, anger, and anticipation. Each emotion is assigned a 1–5 intensity score. For each case, we report the initial emotional state and the five-turn dialogue triggers used for dynamic emotion update. 

H.1 Case 1: Positive Trigger Sequence in Healthcare Training 

This case simulates a patient interacting with medical staff. The initial emotional state is: Joy=1, Trust=2, Fear=4, Surprise=2, Sadness=2, Disgust=1, Anger=1, Anticipation=3 . The trigger sequence is mainly positive, where the doctor gradually provides explanation, reassurance, and a manageable treatment plan. Table 11 presents the turn-level triggers and corresponding input utterances used in this case. 

H.2 Case 2: Negative Trigger Sequence in Customer Service 

This case simulates a customer interacting with a service agent. The initial emotional state is: Joy=1, Trust=3, Fear=1, Surprise=2, Sadness=1, Disgust=1, Anger=2, Anticipation=3 . The trigger sequence is mainly negative, where repeated delay, vague explanation, and lack of compensation gradually increase the emotional tension. Table 12 presents the turn-level triggers and corresponding input utterances used in this case. 

H.3 Case 3: Mixed Trigger Sequence in School Communication 

This case simulates a student interacting with a teacher. The initial emotional state is: Joy=2, Trust=3, Fear=2, Surprise=1, Sadness=2, Disgust=1, Anger=1, Anticipation=3 . The trigger sequence is mixed: Turn Trigger Input Utterance 

t = 1 Delivery delay without clear reason Your order has been delayed, but we do not have a specific reason from the logistics provider yet. 

t = 2 Vague apology and extended wait-ing We are sorry for the inconvenience, but please wait for another few days while we continue checking the status. 

t = 3 Avoidance of compensation request I understand your concern, but I cannot confirm whether compen-sation can be provided at this stage. 

t = 4 Repeated explanation without solu-tion As I mentioned, the delay is still under investigation, and there is no additional update we can provide right now. 

t = 5 Refusal of compensation According to our current policy, this case does not qualify for compensation, so we will close the request for now. 

Table 12: Case 2: Five-turn negative trigger sequence in customer service. 

Turn Trigger Input Utterance 

t = 1 Negative academic feedback Your recent performance has declined compared with your previ-ous work, and we need to talk about what happened. 

t = 2 Increased academic pressure If this continues, you may fall behind the class, so you need to put in more effort from now on. 

t = 3 Emotional validation I understand that you have been under a lot of pressure recently, and that may have affected your performance. 

t = 4 Concrete improvement advice Let us make a study plan together, starting with the topics you find most difficult and reviewing them step by step. 

t = 5 Encouragement and follow-up sup-port I can see that you are trying, and we can meet again next week to check your progress and adjust the plan. 

Table 13: Case 3: Five-turn mixed trigger sequence in school communication. 

the student first receives negative academic feedback, followed by emotional validation, concrete guidance, and encouragement. Table 13 presents the turn-level triggers and corresponding input utterances used in this case.