Title: Beyond the Single Camera: Agentic Multi-View Reasoning in Sports Video Understanding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11844v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 03:01:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Beyond the Single Camera: Agentic Multi-View Reasoning in Sports Video Understanding 

## Kerui Chen 1,∗, Jinglu Wang 2, Xiaoyi Zhang 2, Yan Lu 2,†

> 1

Zhejiang University 2Microsoft Research Asia 

## Abstract 

Recent Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) achieve strong performance on single-view video under-standing benchmarks. However, sports videos involve dense occlusion, rapid motion, and complex interactions that are difficult to resolve from a single viewpoint. In practice, sports events are recorded from multiple camera angles, providing complementary evidence used by referees. Yet, no existing benchmark evaluates MLLMs on multi-view sports video understanding. To address this gap, we in-troduce SportMV-Bench , a comprehensive benchmark built from official match recordings, through a dedicated pipeline combining LLM-based generation, MLLM-based verifica-tion, and human filtering to ensure quality and consistency. SportMV-Bench containing 787 multi-view video bundles and 2592 question-answer pairs across three categories: Perception-Aware Recognition (PAR), Rule-aware Event In-terpretation (REI), and Adjudicative Decision Reasoning (ADR). Our analysis shows that current MLLMs fail to effectively exploit multi-view information, with the bottle-necks lying in fine-grained visual perception and view se-lection rather than logical reasoning or domain knowledge. We propose SportMV-Agent , an agentic framework that or-chestrates an iterative loop of active view selection, per-ception tool execution, and evidence-grounded reasoning, achieving a significant 14.46% relative improvement over the strongest MLLM baseline. 

## 1. Introduction 

Sports video understanding has received significant atten-tion due to its wide applications in analytics [28], coach-ing [12], officiating support [15, 16], content retrieval [44], and audience engagement [29]. Recent Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 5, 21, 36] demonstrate strong capabilities in video understanding and reasoning, 

> †Corresponding author.
> ∗This work was done when K. Chen was an intern at Microsoft Re-search Asia.

making them promising for sports video analysis. However, sports videos pose unique challenges for MLLMs, such as rapid movements, dense player interactions, domain-specific rules, and the need for fine-grained subtle visual cues. Several benchmarks have been developed to study sports video understanding, such as SoccerNet [11], Sports-QA [22], and multi-sport datasets [41, 42]. While these benchmarks advance holistic understanding of broadcast videos, they typically assume that a single camera view pro-vides sufficient evidence for question answering (QA). In real-world, sports events are captured from multiple viewpoints to provide a complete perspective for referees and audiences. Occlusion is common in sports: players often cluster around decisive moments, making critical ac-tions hard to observe from a single view. Moreover, ath-letes may intentionally obscure events through exaggerated contact or simulated falls, making single-view evidence not only incomplete but sometimes misleading. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), using only View 1 or View 2 leads to an in-correct out-of-bounds decision because the decisive touch is occluded, while incorporating View 3 reveals the correct outcome. Beyond occlusion, some queries require combin-ing complementary evidence across views that may even ap-pear conflicting. For example, in Fig. 1(b), View 1 local-izes contact inside the penalty area, while View 2 shows that the defender did not touch the ball. Only by combining both views can the correct decision be made: a yellow card to attacker, and award opponents a defensive free kick rather than a penalty. These examples highlight the importance of multi-view reasoning for sports video understanding. Pro-fessional officiating systems such as VAR, Instant Replay, and Hawk-Eye already rely on multi-camera setups for this reason. However, existing sports QA benchmarks do not evaluate the ability of MLLMs to reason across multiple views of the same event, as they provide only single-view inputs. To fill this gap, we introduce SportMV-Bench , the first benchmark for multi-view sports video understanding. It comprises 787 multi-view video bundles (each with 2-4 di-verse and asynchronous views) and 2592 QA pairs span-ning three reasoning levels: Perception-Aware Recognition 1arXiv:2607.11844v1 [cs.CV] 13 Jul 2026 Figure 1. Importance of multi-view perspectives in sports understanding. (a) Single views ( View 1 & 2) can yield incorrect judg-ments (Player #7 out) due to occlusion, while a more informative view ( View 3) reveals the correct result (Player #23 out). (b) Accurate decisions require aggregating complementary evidence from multiple views to resolve visual ambiguities: the attacker fouls an opponent (View 1) without touching the ball ( View 2), awarding the defensive team a free kick. 

(PAR), Rule Event aware Interpretation (REI), and Adju-dicative Decision Reasoning (ADR). All videos are sourced from official public match recordings to ensure real-world authenticity. QA pairs are constructed through a four-stage pipeline, combining LLM-based generation, multimodal verification and human verification to ensure correctness, consistency with the videos, and visual answerability. Through extensive experiments and analysis, we find that current MLLMs perform poorly and fail to effectively exploit multi-view information. The baseline model (GPT-4.1) with all views jointly provided improves only 2.1 point over the single-view setting, whereas anchoring an oracle view yields a relative 10.6% gain, indicating that decisive evidence exists across views but current models fail to ex-tract it. Moreover, providing ground-truth perception labels improves accuracy by +16.47 points, highlighting the crit-ical role of fine-grained perception in overall performance. We also observe that chain-of-thought reasoning degrades 

performance, and textual domain-specific knowledge pro-vides little improvement. These findings suggest that the primary bottleneck lies not in logical reasoning or domain knowledge, but in visual perception. Motivated by these findings, we propose SportMV-Agent , an agentic multi-view reasoning framework. An orchestrator coordinates an iterative loop of evidence col-lection and evidence-grounded reasoning: it actively se-lects informative views, invokes perception tools to extract fine-grained evidence, and accumulates findings until suf-ficient confidence is reached. Compared to the baseline (GPT-4.1), SportMV-Agent achieves a substantial relative improvement of 14.46% .To sum up, our contributions are as follows: • We present SportMV-Bench , the first multi-view sports video understanding benchmark, consisting of 787 multi-view video bundles and 2592 QA pairs across three rea-soning levels (PAR, REI, ADR). • We conduct a comprehensive empirical study revealing that current MLLMs fail to exploit multi-view evidence, with the bottleneck lying in visual perception and view selection rather than logical reasoning or domain knowl-edge. • We propose SportMV-Agent , an agentic framework whose orchestrator coordinates active view selection, per-ception tool execution, and evidence-grounded reasoning, with design directly motivated by the empirical findings. 

## 2. Related Work 

Sports understanding benchmarks. Early sports under-standing datasets primarily focused on action classifica-tion or action quality assessment in specific sports like soccer [11], basketball [43], diving [23], gymnastics [34] and figure skating [25]. Later datasets expanded the task from simple action classification to temporal action pars-ing [26, 33] and spatio-temporal localization [43], and also introduced a wider variety of sports categories [24]. With the advent of MLLMs [7–9, 27, 45], question-answering (QA) benchmarks emerged as the standard paradigm for evaluating multimodal understanding in sports scenarios. Single-sport datasets include SoccerNet-X Foul [14] and SoccerBench [32] for recognition in soccer, FSBench [10] for scoring in figure skating, and FineBad-2Figure 2. Overview of SportMV-Bench. The benchmark comprises three types of questions, each designed to evaluate a different aspect of sports understanding. Perceptual Action Recognition (PAR) focuses on low-level perceptual grounding. Rule Event Aware Interpretation (REI) targets mid-level event and action understanding. Adjudicative Decision Reasoning (ADR) assesses high-level reasoning, requiring models to integrate event observations with foul rules and decision-making guidelines. (a) The three question types are evenly distributed, accounting for 34.61%, 38.23%, and 27.16%, respectively. (b) A real-match multi-view video example with its corresponding three types. 

minton [13] for rally-level understanding in badminton. Other datasets like Sports-QA [22], SPORTU [41] and SPORTR [42] extend evaluation to multiple sports, incor-porating higher-level reasoning over rules and tactics. How-ever, these benchmarks typically offer a single-view video input, which cannot simulate or evaluate realistic scenarios where occlusions in one viewpoint necessitate joint reason-ing over multiple views. 

Sports understanding methods. Early approaches cast sports understanding as a classification or regression task, focusing on action recognition [24, 34], foul classifica-tion [16], and action quality assessment [10, 23, 31]. With the development of MLLMs, recent state-of-the-art models such as Qwen families [2, 39], GPT families [19, 20], and Gemini families [35, 36] show remarkable general capabil-ities in sports videos. Many existing efforts treat them as a unified tool for tactical analysis [3, 46] and rule-based rea-soning [17]. However, these approaches typically operate on a single viewpoint and assume that all information re-quired to answer the question is fully contained within that view. This assumption simplifies the problem compared to real-world sports scenarios, where key evidence is often distributed across multiple views and individual camera an-gles may suffer from occlusion. As a result, the capabilities of MLLMs in realistic multi-view settings remain largely untested and underexplored, which motivates our evaluation of MLLMs on multi-view sports video understanding. 

## 3. Sport-MV Benchmark 

In this section, we present SportMV-Bench , a benchmark for multi-view sports video understanding designed to eval-uate the capabilities of MLLMs in multi-view scenarios. We detail its problem formulation, data construction pipeline and resulting data statistics. 

Problem formulation. We consider the task of multi-view sports video understanding. Let 

V = {V1, V 2, . . . , V N } denote N videos capturing the same sports event from different camera viewpoints, which may not be temporally synchronized. Given a natural-language question q, the goal is to infer the correct answer 

a by aggregating evidence across the multi-view videos. Each question is formulated as a multiple-choice problem with candidate set A = {a1, a 2, . . . , a K }, where a single ground-truth answer a∗ is annotated and verified by human experts. 

3.1. Dataset Construction 

To construct a reliable and semantically rich QA corpus, we design a pipeline leveraging LLMs and MLLMs, as illus-trated in Fig. 3, which comprises four stages: data collec-tion, LLM-Based QA generation, multimodal verification and authoritative human annotations. 

Stage 1: Data collection. We deploy a domain-specific crawler to collect video sources and their corresponding of-ficial referee from publicly available video platforms. We focus on two representative and challenging sports, bas-ketball and football, which feature both global and local viewpoints, exhibit significant diversity across camera an-gles and scenes, and involve frequent occlusions with com-plex player interactions. For basketball, videos are sourced from the NBA official replay archive platform [30]. We de-3Sports video                               

> LLM -Based QA Proposal Multimodal Verification Manual Filtering
> 5:18 2nd Quarter (2PT/3PT)
> Replay Center communicated
> with the courtside
> administrator and overturned
> the 3pt fg to a 2pt fg .
> Instruction
> Question
> Answer Choice
> Gold Answer
> Final
> Benchmark
> Foul label
> Event caption Foul label
> Event caption
> {"Offense" :"Offense" ,
> "Contact" :"With Contact" ,
> "Bodypart ":"Under body" ,
> "Action" :"Tackling" ,
> ... ,
> "Touch Ball" :"No" }
> Data collection
> Verification Criteria
> -Referee guidelines
> -Commonsense inferable
> -Video correlation
> -Visual inferable
> -Simulate referee
> certification exam
> -Follow referee
> report LLM MLLM
> Segment by
> scene detection
> Filtering Criteria
> -Referee guidelines
> -Commonsense inferable
> -Visual inferable
> -Answer ambiguity
> Filtering
> Referee report

Figure 3. Benchmark construction pipeline. We construct the benchmark through four stages. First, we collect paired videos and official referee reports from public video platforms, where foul labels are available. Second, we employ a LLM to propose candidate QA pairs based on event captions and foul annotations, which helps mitigate the hallucination issue in MLLMs arising from redundant video content. Third, we apply a MLLM to filter these pairs according to criteria such as video–QA consistency and commonsense verification. Finally, human annotators further refine the dataset by removing ambiguous or unreasonable QA pairs. 

liberately prioritize referee challenge plays to increase task difficulty. To obtain multi-view observations of the same ac-tion, we apply PySceneDetect [4] to each replay sequence for viewpoint-change detection. The detected shot bound-aries are used to segment the replay into consecutive shots, which are distinct viewpoints of the same underlying ac-tion instance. For soccer, we adopt videos from SoccerNet 

[11]. SoccerNet natively provides multi-view footage, thus we leverage its provided multi-view organization directly when constructing our benchmark. Alongside the videos, we collect the corresponding official referee reports, which provide event-level records and, in many cases, fine-grained human annotations such as offense or defense, contact type, and body region. These referee reports provide highly au-thoritative textual evidence that supports the construction of reliable QA items and ensures answer verifiability. For each data instance, we therefore obtain a multi-view video set 

V and its associated referee report R. Notably, the multi-view clips for a given event are not temporally synchro-nized, which further increases the difficulty of the task by requiring alignment across views. 

Stage 2: LLM-Based QA proposal. Each referee report collected in Stage 1 can serve as the factual answer source. We feed it to an LLM and instruct it to simulate a referee certification exam setter. For each report, the model needs to propose multiple-choice questions strictly grounded in the report and produce one gold answer copied from the report. Distractors are required to be of the same seman-tic type as the gold answer and to be minimally contrasting variants drawn from non-deciding details in the same report, so that guessing by type mismatch is avoided. The prompt enforces no external knowledge, no hallucinated entities, and a fixed JSON-formatted output containing the question, options, and gold answer, denoted as the tuple (q, A, a ∗).Each synthesized item is linked to the corresponding multi-view clips for later multimodal verification. In fact, we also attempted to condition the MLLM on both the referee re-port and the associated video clip for QA synthesis, but the results were suboptimal. Please see the supplementary ma-terial for more details. 

Stage 3: Multimodal verification. Despite the instruction constraints in Stage 2, a subset of synthesized QA items still deviate from the referee report, are inferable by common-sense alone, are unrelated to the video, or lack sufficient vi-sual evidence to be inferable. We therefore employ a strong MLLM (GPT-5 [1]) as an auditor. For each candidate tuple 

(q, A, a ∗) with the referee report R and multi-view clips V,the auditor is prompted to 1) verify whether the predicted answer is consistent with the R; 2) determine whether the item is commonsense-inferable, 3) check whether the QA pair is semantically aligned with the video content, and 4) assess whether the answer can be inferred from the video. We define a visual-inferable confidence score ∈ [0 , 10] to quantify this verification process. Instances that fail either the consistency and commonsense check, or fall below the confidence threshold, are filtered out. To reduce artifacts, the audit is repeated three times with the view order shuf-fled, and an item must pass all audits to be accepted. 

Stage 4: Authoritative manual filtering. Finally, expert annotators review the remaining items to remove ambigu-ous, non-visual, weakly grounded, or ill-posed questions, and to refine the wording and options so that the gold an-swer is clear and unique. The resulting corpus attains high precision in linguistic form and multimodal alignment, pro-viding a robust basis for evaluating multi-view, fine-grained visual–textual understanding in sports officiating contexts. 

3.2. Dataset Statistics 

Our final SportMV-Bench consists of 2592 QA multi-view pairs. Each instance couples a natural language question with a set of video clips capturing the same event from different cameras. Producing the correct answer requires aggregating complementary evidence across views, thereby evaluating an MLLM’s capability to understand and reason over multi-camera sports footage. As shown in Fig. 2, we categorize questions into three types, PAR, REI, and ADR, 4which account for 34.61% , 38.23% , and 27.16% of the corpus, respectively. These categories reflect increasing lev-els of reasoning and dependence on multi-view evidence. We detail each category as follows: • Perception-Aware Recognition (PAR). Evaluates low-level perceptual grounding of what happened across views (e.g., tackle, block, push). The focus is on robust action identification under occlusion, motion blur, or ad-verse framing, benefiting from cross-view corroboration. • Rule Event Aware Interpretation (REI). Probes mid-level, event/rule-sensitive reasoning: REI consists of questions whose interpretation depends on rule or event-based anchors specified in the query itself. Models are required to localize these anchors in space and time from different view clips and then obtain rule or event-related answers about what happens before or after these anchors. • Adjudicative Decision Reasoning (ADR). Assesses high-level normative inference by synthesizing multi-camera views to conclude what should be called . This in-volves localizing the foul context (e.g., inside vs. outside the box), estimating severity and intent, and mapping the situation to the appropriate sanction (yellow/red card, free kick, penalty, flagrant) without any explicit hints, thereby rigorously testing cross-view spatiotemporal integration and rule-grounded decision making. In summary, SportMV-Bench is the first benchmark that requires MLLMs to jointly reason across multiple asyn-chronous camera views of the same sports event. Its three-level question hierarchy (PAR, REI, ADR) mirrors the cog-nitive process of real-world sports officiating, from perceiv-ing actions, to interpreting events under rules, to rendering adjudicative decisions. A natural question arises: can cur-rent MLLMs handle these challenges? 

## 4. Benchmark Analysis and Findings 

In this section, we establish a baseline evaluation protocol for MLLMs on SportMV-Bench and conduct a systematic analysis to diagnose performance bottlenecks. 

4.1. Baseline Evaluation Protocol 

Given the multi-view video set V and question q, an MLLM predicts the answer ˆa = MLLM (V, q ) by aggregating evi-dence across views. A straightforward baseline is to treat the multi-view bundle as a single concatenated input, del-egating all view selection, noise suppression, and cross-view fusion to the MLLM. Specifically, we pack all views with view-identifier tokens and question q into a unified se-quence S and feed it to the MLLM: 

ˆa = MLLM (S), S = [ q; ⟨VIEW 1 ⟩ X1; . . . ; ⟨VIEW N ⟩ XN ],

(1) where Xi denotes uniformly sampled frames from view 

Vi. For multiple-choice QA, the prediction follows like-lihood maximization: ˆa = arg max ak ∈A log pθ (ak | S).This baseline imposes no explicit structure for cross-view reasoning; the MLLM must implicitly identify informative viewpoints, discount misleading perspectives, and integrate complementary cues within its fixed context budget. We evaluate a broad set of state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary MLLMs under this protocol; detailed ex-perimental setup and full quantitative results are provided in Sec. 6. Overall, performance falls short of expectations, revealing substantial challenges in this task. 

4.2. Bottleneck Analysis 

Beyond general video understanding, multi-view sports un-derstanding introduces two additional challenges: (1) effec-tive exploitation of multi-view information, and (2) robust sports-specific reasoning. We analyze these aspects through controlled experiments and extract insights that guide our method design. Detailed numerical results are provided in the supplementary material. 

4.2.1. Can MLLMs effectively leverage multi-view infor-mation? 

To examine how multi-view information affects MLLM performance, we evaluate MLLMs under four view config-urations that vary in two dimensions: view quantity (single vs. multiple) and view quality (random vs. best vs. guided). • ❶ 1-View (Random) : a single randomly sampled viewpoint; • ❷ 1-View (Best) : the most suitable viewpoint for the question, annotated by a strong MLLM (GPT-5); • ❸ M-View (All) : all available viewpoints provided jointly; • ❹ M-View (Guided) : multiple views provided, with explicit instruction to prioritize the best view while using others as auxiliary references. All configurations follow the baseline evaluation protocol in Eq. (1), differing only in the active views included in S and in prompting. We evaluate GPT-4.1 and Qwen3-VL-30B, and the results are shown in Fig. 4. We observe two key findings: 

1) Quantity of views ̸ = quality of information. M-View (All) yields only marginal gains over 1-View (Random) and remains substantially worse than 1-View (Best) . Redundant, occluded, or misleading angles intro-duce visual noise that offsets the benefit of complementary perspectives. 

2) Active view selection is critical. M-View (Guided) 

achieves the best performance. The optimal strategy is not to ingest more views, but to selectively focus on and ag-gregate the informative ones. Current MLLMs lack ex-plicit mechanisms for autonomous view selection, struc-tured cross-view aggregation, and evidence-aware reason-ing. 5Figure 4. Analysis of view configurations on MLLM performance. Figure 5. Effect of the different strategies on MLLM performance. 

4.2.2. What can improve sports-specific reasoning? 

We further examine representative strategies targeting rea-soning bottlenecks:(1) Chain-of-Thought (COT ), a widely adopted strategy for enhancing reasoning in LLMs; (2) 

Sports-specific knowledge (SP-Knowledge ), which pro-vides domain knowledge that the MLLM may lack; and (3) Fine-grained visual perception (FG-Perception ), which supplies fine-grained action and contact recognition and grounding information. The effects of these strategies are shown in Fig. 5. We draw the following three lessons: 

1) COT solely cannot improve performance. Despite its proven effectiveness in many language and vision-language tasks, COT reasoning surprisingly leads to a decline in ac-curacy for both GPT-4.1 and Qwen3-VL-30B on our bench-mark. This suggests that in complex multi-view sports scenes, sequential reasoning without reliable visual ground-ing amplifies hallucination rather than improving decision quality. 

2) Domain knowledge is not the primary bottleneck. We provide detailed sports-specific guidelines for each option, generated by GPT-5 to highlight decisive cues. As shown in Fig. 5, performance gains are negligible, indicating that conceptual knowledge is not the limiting factor. 

3) Fine-grained visual perception is decisive. When sup-plied with ground-truth action and contact annotations (pro-vided by the dataset), performance improves dramatically. This indicates that precise perception of player actions and interactions constitutes a primary bottleneck for MLLMs in multi-view sports understanding. High-level reasoning strategies alone cannot compensate for deficiencies in low-level perceptual accuracy. 

Summary. Our analysis reveals three core bottlenecks for baseline MLLMs: (1) the inability to autonomously select informative views, (2) fragile reasoning performance that is highly sensitive to perceptual errors, and (3) insufficient fine-grained visual perception, particularly for action recog-nition and contact detection. 

## 5. SportMV-Agent 

As analyzed in Sec. 4, existing MLLMs struggle with multi-view sports understanding. A single forward pass forces the model to passively process all perspectives at once, includ-ing occlusion and misleading evidence. We instead adopt an agentic approach: SportMV-Agent actively decides which view to examine, invokes specialized perception tools to extract concrete evidence, and iteratively accumulates find-ings until sufficient confidence is reached. 

Overview. As illustrated in Fig. 6, SportMV-Agent takes as input a question q, multi-view videos V, and a set of per-ception tools T , and outputs the predicted answer ˆa. The framework consists of an orchestrator that coordinates an iterative loop of evidence collection and evidence-grounded reasoning , continuing until sufficient evidence is gathered for a confident prediction. 

5.1. Orchestration 

The orchestrator πθ serves as the central controller of SportMV-Agent. The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. It maintains a reasoning state st =(q, Vact 

> t−1

, Et−1) comprising the question, the currently ac-tive views, and accumulated evidence from previous steps. At each iteration, given st, the orchestrator generates a thought Ht and an operation ot. Ht represents a textual analysis and plan for the next step. ot is either the final answer or an evidence collection operation for next step, determined by the confidence of Ht. If the confidence is in-sufficient, the orchestrator triggers the evidence-collection operation ot to obtain new evidence Et; otherwise, it out-puts the final answer ˆa.6Figure 6. Overview of SportMV-Agent. The orchestrator coordinates an iterative loop: at each step it selects views, invokes perception tools, analyzes evidence reliability, and decides whether to continue or emit the final answer. 

Algorithm 1 Agentic procedure. 

Require: q, V = {V1, . . . , V N }, T , πθ

Ensure: Predicted answer ˆa 

> 1:

Vact 0 ← V ; E0 ← ∅ ; t ← 1 ▷ initialize  

> 2:

while t ≤ tmax do  

> 3:

st ← (q, Vact 

> t−1

, Et−1) ▷ construct state  

> 4:

(Ht, o t) ← πθ (st) ▷ generate thought + op.  

> 5:

if sufficient confidence from Ht then  

> 6:

return ˆa ← ot ▷ emit final answer  

> 7:

else if ot is V IEW SELECT then  

> 8:

Vact  

> t

← ot(V) ▷ select views  

> 9:

Et ← πθ (Vact  

> t

) ▷ collect evidence  

> 10:

else if ot is T OOL EXEC then  

> 11:

(T act , V tool ) ← ot(T , V) ▷ select tool, target view  

> 12:

Et ← πθ (T act (V tool )) ▷ collect evidence  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

Et ← E t−1 ∪{ Et}; t ← t+1 ▷ accumulate evidence  

> 15:

end while 

5.2. Evidence Collection 

Evidence is collected through two types of operations, auto-matically selected by the orchestrator based on the current state. 

Active view selection. In complex sporting events, the “op-timal” view is dynamic and context-dependent. When the orchestrator determines that the current view suffers from occlusion, motion blur, or lacks critical detail, it triggers a view-selection operation ot = VIEW SELECT to select informative angles Vact  

> t

⊆ V . Initially, the system starts with access to the full set of available views, denoted as 

Vact 0 = V. Whenever a view switch occurs, the video seg-ment from the newly selected view is integrated into the agent’s observation context. 

Active tool selection and execution. Fine-grained percep-tion is demonstrated to be critical for multi-view sports un-derstanding. We equip the framework with a Perception Toolbox T that delivers sports-specific expertise as percep-tion rather than text. The orchestrator invokes these tools through the operation ot = TOOL EXEC , which selects the appropriate tool and target view based on the current state. The toolbox are extendable and currently includes three fundamental tools designed for sports analysis: • Action Recognition (Tact ): outputs a ranked list of ac-tion names with confidence scores. • Contact Detection (Tcon ): outputs a binary judgment of whether physical contact occurs between two players. • Contact Part Detection (Tpar ): triggered when contact is detected, outputs the body region involved. For example, given a football play question, the orchestrator may start from a global view to identify the foul area. Re-alizing that the specific action type and physical contact is obscured, it triggers a view switch to a close-up sideline an-gle, invokes Tact to categorize the type of action, and then invokes Tcon to determine the situation of contact before emitting a final decision. 

## 6. Experiment 

In this section, we evaluate both baseline MLLMs and our proposed SportMV-Agent on SportMV-Bench. We first present the main results comparing SportMV-Agent against state-of-the-art MLLMs, followed by ablation studies that validate the contribution of each component. 7Table 1. Quantitative comparisons of the existing state-of-the-art MLLMs on the SportMV-Bench. The best and second best results are bold and underlined. All the numbers are presented in %.                                         

> Model PAR REI ADR Overall LLaVa-Next [21] 47.52 59.25 31.07 48.19 Qwen2.5-VL-72B [2] 46.43 55.43 35.63 47.28 Qwen3-VL-30B [37] 44.11 55.05 29.25 44.89 InternVL2.5 [6] 45.78 58.21 34.31 47.81 GLM-4.5V [38] 49.95 60.02 32.88 49.79 DeepSeek-VL [40] 34.91 37.16 27.77 34.06 GPT-4o [18] 54.41 61.59 40.95 53.67 GPT-4.1 [18] 58.44 68.76 46.82 59.68 SportMV-Agent 67.81 73.16 58.22 68.31

Baseline MLLMs. We evaluate eight state-of-the-art MLLMs on SportMV-Bench using the protocol in Sec. 4, including open-source models (LLaVA-Next [21], Qwen2.5-VL-72B [2], Qwen3-VL-30B [37], InternVL2.5-38B [6], GLM-4.5V [38], DeepSeek-VL [40]) and propri-etary models (GPT-4o [18], GPT-4.1). 

Implementation details. Videos are processed at 2 fps. We report exact-match accuracy averaged over three runs. Each model receives the same prompt and outputs the an-swer within <answer>...</answer> tags, parsed via regex (with gpt-4.1-mini as fallback). In SportMV-Agent, GPT-4.1 serves as the orchestrator, while Qwen2.5-VL-72B implements the perception tools, returning top-3 predictions with confidence scores. Additional details are provided in the supplementary material. 

6.1. Main Result 

We report the main quantitative results in Tab. 1. Among all the baseline MLLMs, GPT-4.1 achieves the best perfor-mance at 59.68%. For the open-source models, GLM-4.5V leads with 49.79%, but still lags substantially behind pro-prietary models. Notably, models with strong general video understanding capabilities, such as Qwen3-VL-30B, show a performance drop on our multi-view benchmark, high-lighting the unique challenges of multi-perspective sports reasoning. A category-wise results reveal that most models excel in REI but struggle with PAR and ADR, with average performance gaps of about 9.2% and 21.1%, respectively. As identified in Sec. 4, REI often depends on a single de-cisive cue, while PAR suffers from occlusion and ADR re-quires cross-view evidence integration with rule-based rea-soning. SportMV-Agent, using GPT-4.1 as the orchestrator, significantly boosts performance from 59.68% to 68.31% ,a relative improvement of 14.46%. This validates that the agentic design, effectively bridges the multi-view reasoning gap that standard MLLMs fail to address. A qualitative comparison with the COT baseline is shown in Fig. 7. COT suffers from visual error accumula-tion, whereas SportMV-Agent actively selects the most in-

Table 2. Ablation study on the key elements in SportMV-Agent. The VS column indicates whether the framework uses active view selection. Red/green numbers indicate improvement/decline rela-tive to our implemenation of SportMV-Agent (row 6).                                                        

> Orchestrator Tool Top-K VS PAR REI ADR Overall 1GPT-4.1 ---58.44 -9.37 68.76 -4.40 46.82 -11.40 59.68 -8.63
> 2GPT-4o Qwen Top-3 ✓58.61 -9.20 65.99 -7.17 44.34 -13.88 58.12 -10.19
> 3GPT-4.1 Qwen Top-3 ×61.05 -6.76 65.68 -7.48 50.39 -7.83 61.03 -7.28
> 4GPT-4.1 GPT-4.1 Top-3 ✓70.44 +2.63 72.20 -0.96 56.16 -2.06 68.46 +0.15
> 5GPT-4.1 Qwen Top-1 ✓67.26 -0.55 70.49 -2.67 53.48 -4.74 66.04 -2.27
> 6GPT-4.1 Qwen Top-3 ✓67.81 73.16 58.22 68.31

formative view to capture critical details and reach the cor-rect decision. This example demonstrates how view switch-ing and tool invocation mitigates occlusion and improves multi-view evidence integration. 

6.2. Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation studies to evaluate the contributions of key components in SportMV-Agent, summarized in Tab. 2. The performance of SportMV-Agent is shown in Row 6. 

Impact of the orchestrator model. As shown in Row 2, replacing GPT-4.1 with the less capable GPT-4o as the or-chestrator results in a performance drop of 8.6%, underscor-ing the critical role of a strong reasoning backbone for ef-fective evidence-grounded multi-view understanding. 

Impact of active view selection. As shown in Row 3, dis-abling the view switching module leads to a performance drop of 7.28%. By actively switching to viewpoints with fewer occlusions, the orchestrator provides higher-quality visual inputs for perception tools, thereby reducing percep-tual ambiguity and limiting error propagation. This obser-vation aligns with the view-selection bottleneck identified in Sec. 4. 

Impact of perception tool models. As shown in Row 4, replacing the Qwen perception tool with GPT-4.1 yields only a marginal overall improvement of 0.15%. Only the PAR category that focuses more on perception improves by 2.63%, while the other two categories even decline slightly. This suggests that the framework is robust to the choice of perception models and can leverage more cost-effective al-ternatives without significant loss in performance. 

Robustness to tool response noise. As shown in Row 5, re-stricting the retrieved results from top-3 candidates to top-1 results leads to a performance drop of 2.27%. This suggests that the framework possesses an inherent self-correction mechanism; by providing a broader candidate set, the or-chestrator’s evidence analysis can filter out noise and rectify potential retrieval errors. 

6.3. Benchmark Construction Analysis. 

We analyze the limitations of directly generating QA pairs with an MLLM conditioned on video inputs. As shown in Fig. 8, the model may hallucinate events not present in the video (e.g., mentioning a sliding tackle when the video 8Figure 7. Qualitative example. Comparison between the reasoning outputs of SportMV-Agent and the COT baseline. The COT strategy suffers from visual error accumulation: due to occlusions in View 1 and View 2, it fails to consider the critical evidence visible in View 3, incorrectly classifying the shot as a 3-pointer. In contrast, SportMV-Agent actively selects the most informative viewpoint ( View 3 ), capturing the player’s foot-on-line detail. By combining view selection with perception tools, the framework correctly identifies the event as a 2-point field goal without foul. Key clues are highlighted in yellow, view anlysis in blue, tool perception in green. After the attacker is tripped by the  sliding defender  near the right     

> edge of the penalty area, what is the precise classification of the
> offense?
> A:Careless trip from a standing tackle with lower -leg contact,
> no play on the ball.
> B:Reckless sliding tackle taking the ball first.
> C:Fair shoulder -to -shoulder challenge with no contact to the legs
> D:Holding offence by grabbing the opponent’s arm
> View 1 View 2

Figure 8. Hallucination in MLLM-generated QA. 

shows a standing tackle). Our pipeline combines LLM-based generation with subsequent MLLM verification to en-sure QA–video consistency. Further analysis is provided in the supplementary material. 

## 7. Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce SportMV-Bench, the first multi-view benchmark designed to evaluate MLLMs on multi-view sports video understanding. SportMV-Bench is built from real-world sports match videos, covers three primary question types, and contains 2,592 QA pairs that have been dual filtered by an MLLM and human annotators. Exper-iments reveal that current models often fail to select deci-sive viewpoints, perform precise perception, and aggregate complementary evidence, leading to large gaps in multi-view sports understanding. To address these challenges, we present SportMV-Agent, an agentic framework equipped with an active view selection mechanism and the ability to invoke various perception tools. We hope this challenge benchmark will foreground the importance of multi-view evidence in sports video understanding and promote meth-ods that advance robust multi-view reasoning in MLLMs for real-world applications. 9References 

[1] GPT-5 System Card OpenAI, 2025. 1, 4, 12 [2] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. 1, 3, 8, 13 [3] Matthew Caron and Oliver Müller. Tacticalgpt: uncovering the potential of llms for predicting tactical decisions in pro-fessional football. In StatsBomb Conference , pages 1–11, 2023. 3 [4] Brandon Castellano. PySceneDetect. 4 [5] Kerui Chen, Jinglu Wang, Jianrong Zhang, Ming Li, Yan Lu, and Hehe Fan. Scaling video understanding via compact latent multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.00444 , 2026. 1 [6] Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Zhang-wei Gao, Erfei Cui, Jinguo Zhu, Shenglong Ye, Hao Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, et al. Expanding performance boundaries of open-source multimodal models with model, data, and test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05271 , 2024. 8 [7] Xinyu Fang, Kangrui Mao, Haodong Duan, Xiangyu Zhao, Yining Li, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. Mmbench-video: A long-form multi-shot benchmark for holistic video under-standing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:89098–89124, 2024. 2 [8] Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, et al. Mme: A comprehensive evaluation bench-mark for multimodal large language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2025. [9] Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 24108–24118, 2025. 2[10] Rong Gao, Xin Liu, Zhuozhao Hu, Bohao Xing, Baiqiang Xia, Zitong Yu, and Heikki Kälviäinen. Fsbench: A fig-ure skating benchmark for advancing artistic sports under-standing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 13595–13605, 2025. 2, 3 [11] Silvio Giancola, Mohieddine Amine, Tarek Dghaily, and Bernard Ghanem. Soccernet: A scalable dataset for action spotting in soccer videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops ,pages 1711–1721, 2018. 1, 2, 4, 13 [12] Ryan Groom and Lee Nelson. The application of video-based performance analysis in the coaching process 1: The coach supporting athlete learning. In Routledge handbook of sports coaching , pages 96–107. Routledge, 2013. 1 [13] Xusheng He, Wei Liu, Shanshan Ma, Qian Liu, Chenghao Ma, and Jianlong Wu. Finebadminton: A multi-level dataset for fine-grained badminton video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07554 , 2025. 3 [14] Jan Held, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Abdullah Hamdi, Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. Vars: Video assistant referee system for automated soccer decision making from multiple views. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5086–5097, 2023. 2 [15] Jan Held, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Abdullah Hamdi, Christel Devue, Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. Towards ai-powered video assistant ref-eree system for association football. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2407, 2024. 1 [16] Jan Held, Hani Itani, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. X-vars: Introducing explainability in football refereeing with multi-modal large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3267–3279, 2024. 1, 3 [17] Jan Held, Hani Itani, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. X-vars: Introducing explainability in football refereeing with multi-modal large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3267–3279, 2024. 3 [18] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perel-man, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Weli-hinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. 8 [19] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perel-man, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Weli-hinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. 3 [20] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richard-son, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720 , 2024. 3 [21] Feng Li, Renrui Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-next-interleave: Tackling multi-image, video, and 3d in large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07895 , 2024. 1, 8 [22] Haopeng Li, Andong Deng, Qiuhong Ke, Jun Liu, Hos-sein Rahmani, Yulan Guo, Bernt Schiele, and Chen Chen. Sports-qa: A large-scale video question answering bench-mark for complex and professional sports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01505 , 2024. 1, 3 [23] Yingwei Li, Yi Li, and Nuno Vasconcelos. Resound: To-wards action recognition without representation bias. In 

Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 513–528, 2018. 2, 3 [24] Yixuan Li, Lei Chen, Runyu He, Zhenzhi Wang, Gang-shan Wu, and Limin Wang. Multisports: A multi-person video dataset of spatio-temporally localized sports actions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 13536–13545, 2021. 2, 3 [25] Shenlan Liu, Xiang Liu, Gao Huang, Lin Feng, Lianyu Hu, Dong Jiang, Aibin Zhang, Yang Liu, and Hong Qiao. Fsd-10: a dataset for competitive sports content analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03312 , 2020. 2 

10 [26] Shenglan Liu, Aibin Zhang, Yunheng Li, Jian Zhou, Li Xu, Zhuben Dong, and Renhao Zhang. Temporal segmentation of fine-gained semantic action: A motion-centered figure skating dataset. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , pages 2163–2171, 2021. 2 [27] Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan, Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, et al. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around player? In European conference on computer vi-sion , pages 216–233. Springer, 2024. 2 [28] Rob Mackenzie and Chris Cushion. Performance analysis in football: A critical review and implications for future re-search. Journal of sports sciences , 31(6):639–676, 2013. 1 [29] Cise Midoglu, Saeed Shafiee Sabet, Mehdi Housh-mand Sarkhoosh, Mohammad Majidi, Sushant Gautam, Håkon Maric Solberg, Tomas Kupka, and Pål Halvorsen. Ai-based sports highlight generation for social media. In Pro-ceedings of the 3rd Mile-High Video Conference , pages 7– 13, 2024. 1 [30] National Basketball Association. Official NBA Replay Archive. https://official.nba.com/replay/ archive/ , 2025. Accessed: 2025-11-13. 3 [31] Paritosh Parmar and Brendan Morris. Action quality assess-ment across multiple actions. In 2019 IEEE winter con-ference on applications of computer vision (WACV) , pages 1468–1476. IEEE, 2019. 3 [32] Jiayuan Rao, Zifeng Li, Haoning Wu, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Multi-agent system for comprehen-sive soccer understanding. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 3654–3663, 2025. 2 [33] Dian Shao, Yue Zhao, Bo Dai, and Dahua Lin. Intra-and inter-action understanding via temporal action parsing. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 730–739, 2020. 2 [34] Dian Shao, Yue Zhao, Bo Dai, and Dahua Lin. Finegym: A hierarchical video dataset for fine-grained action under-standing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2616–2625, 2020. 2, 3 [35] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. 3 [36] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of con-text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 , 2024. 1, 3 [37] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. 8, 12 [38] V Team, Wenyi Hong, Wenmeng Yu, et al. Glm-4.5 v and glm-4.1 v-thinking: Towards versatile multimodal reason-ing with scalable reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01006 , 2025. 8 [39] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. 3 [40] Zhiyu Wu, Xiaokang Chen, Zizheng Pan, Xingchao Liu, Wen Liu, Damai Dai, Huazuo Gao, Yiyang Ma, Chengyue Wu, Bingxuan Wang, et al. Deepseek-vl2: Mixture-of-experts vision-language models for advanced multimodal understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10302 , 2024. 8 [41] Haotian Xia, Zhengbang Yang, Junbo Zou, Rhys Tracy, Yuqing Wang, Chi Lu, Christopher Lai, Yanjun He, Xun Shao, Zhuoqing Xie, et al. Sportu: A comprehensive sports understanding benchmark for multimodal large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08474 , 2024. 1, 3[42] Haotian Xia, Haonan Ge, Junbo Zou, Hyun Woo Choi, Xue-bin Zhang, Danny Suradja, Botao Rui, Ethan Tran, Wendy Jin, Zhen Ye, et al. Sportr: A benchmark for multimodal large language model reasoning in sports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06499 , 2025. 1, 3 [43] Jinglin Xu, Guohao Zhao, Sibo Yin, Wenhao Zhou, and Yuxin Peng. Finesports: A multi-person hierarchical sports video dataset for fine-grained action understanding. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21773–21782, 2024. 2, 13 [44] Yiqing Yu, Huayong Liu, Hongbin Wang, and Dongru Zhou. Content-based tv sports video retrieval using multimodal analysis. In Third International Symposium on Multispectral Image Processing and Pattern Recognition , pages 962–967. SPIE, 2003. 1 [45] Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for ex-pert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9556– 9567, 2024. 2 [46] Jiawen Zhang, Dongliang Han, Shuai Han, Heng Li, Wing-Kai Lam, and Mingyu Zhang. Chatmatch: Exploring the po-tential of hybrid vision–language deep learning approach for the intelligent analysis and inference of racket sports. Com-puter Speech & Language , 89:101694, 2025. 3 

11 Appendix 

In this Appendix, we present the following: • Sec. A: Detailed Quantitative Results of Benchmark Analysis • Sec. B: Discussion of MLLM-Based QA Generation • Sec. C: More Qualitative Examples • Sec. D: More Implementation Details • Sec. E: Future Outlook 

## A. Detailed Quantitative Results of Bench-mark Analysis 

In the main paper (Sec. 4), we conducted a systematic anal-ysis of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to identify the bottlenecks in multi-view sports video under-standing. In this section, we provide more experiment de-tails and present the specific experimental values to support these findings. 

Quantitative results of view configurations. We first de-tails the annotation of the best view. We provide the GPT-5 [1] with the complete multi-view video sequences along-side the ground-truth answers. The model is then tasked to assign a diagnostic score to each individual viewpoint, evaluating the informational sufficiency of that specific per-spective for answering the query. The best view for each sample is subsequently defined as the viewpoint with the highest score. As shown in Tab. 3, the quantitative results verify our findings in detail. All View (44.89% Overall) provides more visual information than a Random View 

(43.93%), it significantly underperforms compared to the 

Best View (47.57%). Guided Multi-view achieves the highest score across all metrics (50.75% Overall), out-performing All View by 5.86 points. Meanwhile, the nu-merical results clearly demonstrate that strategic view se-lection yields substantial improvements across all tasks, in-cluding ADR, REI, and PAR. 

Quantitative Results of different strategies. Tab. 4 details how different strategies affect the performance of Qwen3-VL-30B [37] and GPT-4.1. For both models, the inclu-sion of Chain-of-Thought (+COT) reasoning con-sistently leads to a performance drop (e.g., GPT-4.1 falls from 59.68% to 52.73%). The decline is observed in all the task category, indicating that sequential reasoning without precise visual grounding often leads to compounded hal-lucinations. For injecting sports-specific knowledge, we prompt the GPT-5 to summarize the key elements needed to distinguish each choice in 3-4 sentences. However, Qwen and GPT-4.1 all yields only minor improvements (+1.33% for Qwen; +0.86% for GPT). To simulate ideal percep-tual capabilities, we provide the models with ground-truth 

> Table 3. Effect of different view configurations on MLLM perfor-mance.

Setting PAR REI ADR Overall All View 44.11 55.05 29.25 44.89 Random View 43.29 55.27 27.09 43.93 Best View 46.02 58.96 31.84 47.57 Guided Multi-view 49.69 62.65 32.41 50.75 

> Table 4. Effect of different strategies on MLLM performance.

Setting PAR REI ADR Overall Qwen3-VL-30B 44.11 55.05 29.25 44.89 +COT 41.26 47.01 28.38 41.06 +Knowledge 44.37 58.94 30.01 46.22 +GT Tool 90.25 63.77 37.22 66.70 GPT-4.1 58.44 68.76 46.82 59.68 +COT 51.89 59.53 43.17 52.73 +Knowledge 56.51 69.41 50.71 60.54 +GT Tool 90.37 77.33 54.85 76.15 annotations for actions and physical interactions in FG-Perception experiment. For the football subset (based on the SoccerNet dataset), we leverage its native high-fidelity an-notations, including specific action classes, contact occur-rences, and the exact body parts involved. For the basket-ball subset, we employ GPT-5 to synthesize these granular features by processing official referee reports. Specifically, GPT-5 is prompted to extract the action class, determine the presence of contact, and identify the specific contact part; in cases where the information is missing, it is labeled as "unknown". 

## B. Discussion of MLLM-Based QA Generation 

As mentioned in the main paper, using MLLMs as a QA generator can yield undesirable items once visual input is introduced. Beyond the failure mode discussed in the main paper, we observe three additional types: • Hallucinated Answer Choice. The MLLM sometimes misperceives the visual scene, and such erroneous visual information is mixed with the correct signals from the ref-eree report, giving rise to spurious but plausible answer options. As shown in Fig. 9, the referee report clearly labels the decision as a free kick. However, after incor-porating visual information, the MLLM incorrectly intro-duces spurious events (e.g., a holding foul in the confused image) into the options, resulting in no candidate corre-sponding to the true decision. • Easily Answerable Item. Some questions are supposed to require first perceiving the video and then reasoning 12 Which offense category best applies to this infringement ?  

> A:Direct free kick for holding an opponent .
> B:Penalty kick for tripping an opponent..
> C:No offense; fair challenge.
> D: Deliberate handball resulting in a direct free kick.
> View 1 View 2
> Confused Image

Figure 9. Hallucinated Answer Choice Example. The direct free kick is actually caused by a sliding tackle, but the MLLM intro-duces wrong visual information into the options, so none of the options is correct. As the Manchester United attacker cuts inside near the right edge       

> of the penalty area, the Arsenal defender slides and clips the
> attacker’s leg with no clear ball contact. Which action
> classification best describes the defender’s challenge in the clip ?
> A:Aerial challeng e.
> B:Standing tackl e.
> C:Sliding tackle .
> D:Goalkeeper’s challenge with hands.
> View 1 View 2

Figure 10. Easily Answerable Item Example. The key cue “slide” already appears in the question, so the MLLM can easily produce the correct answer without real understanding, which is undesir-able for evaluation. Based on the given videos, during which phase of the NBA season 

> is this game being played ?
> A:Late regular -season game fighting for playoff seeding .
> B:Eastern Conference Play -In Tournament .
> C:Eastern Conference Finals, Game 1.
> D:Eastern Conference First -Round playoff game.
> View 1 View 2

Figure 11. General Video Question Example. The question and options are all correct, but is unrelated to the sports knowledge. 

over the context. However, the MLLM may directly in-clude the information that should be visually perceived in the question, making the resulting item overly simple. As shown in Fig. 10, although the correct answer is a sliding tackle, the MLLM explicitly encodes the observed visual cue (“defender slide”) in the question. This causes the question to be trivial and easily answerable even without watching the video. Meanwhile, when we use the same MLLM (GPT-5) to both generate and answer the QA pairs, it solves almost all questions correctly. We hypoth-esize that this is because constraining the MLLM to pro-duce visually verifiable questions encourages it to gener-ate relatively simple items whose answers lie well within GPT-5’s existing capabilities, thereby failing to probe the model’s unknown weaknesses or more challenging failure modes. • General Video Question. The introduction of visual in-formation may lead the MLLM to generate overly gen-eral questions that can be answered without any sports-specific understanding, which is misaligned with our evaluation objective. As shown in Fig. 11, the generated question asks about the phase of the NBA season, which can be answered directly from the scoreboard in view 1. However, this question is unrelated to sports knowledge and thus misaligned with our evaluation goal. Which action classification best describes the defender’s challenge   

> in the clip ?
> A:Standing tackle .
> B:Sliding tackle .
> C:Holding.
> D: Pushing.
> MLLM Answer: B

Figure 12. A common basic perceptual error in MLLMs. 

## C. More Qualitative Examples 

In this section, we provide a qualitative comparison result (Fig. 13) in addition between our SportMV-Agent and the COT strategy. As illustrated in Fig. 13, CoT fails to provide a correct ruling for this complex ADR case. A closer in-spection of the CoT reasoning process reveals that its lack of dynamic viewpoint switching leads it to overlook the il-legal contact initiated by the offensive player in View 3. In contrast, SportMV-Agent successfully identifies this infrac-tion by strategically switching perspectives and invoking specialized contact-detection tools. By capturing the upper-body contact (specifically at the neck) and synthesizing in-formation across multiple views, our method correctly clas-sifies the incident as an offensive foul in accordance with official regulations. 

## D. More Implementation Details 

As mentioned in the main paper, we leverage Qwen2.5-VL-72B [2] as the action recognition tool, contact detection tool and contact part detection tool in our proposed agen-tic framework. The output of the action recognition and contact part detection tool comprises the Top-3 retrieval re-sults and their corresponding confidence scores. In this sec-tion, we will provide more details. For action recognition, we restrict the model’s output space to the predefined ac-tion taxonomies of the respective datasets. Specifically, for soccer tasks, the model is constrained to the action classes defined in SoccerNet[11]; for basketball tasks, it is limited to the categories within FineSports[43]. This definition of action sets is comprehensive enough for the relevant sports categories, effectively preventing ’open-set’ hallucinations and facilitating a more objective evaluation of the reasoning pipeline. For the contact part detection tool, we employ a hierarchical classification strategy. The model is required to first categorize the contact as either upper body or un-der body before specifying the exact anatomical part. This coarse-to-fine approach reduces initial search complexity 13 Figure 13. Qualitative example. Comparison between the reasoning outputs of SportMV-Agent and the COT baseline. The COT strategy suffers from visual missing: it fails to consider the critical evidence visible in View 3, incorrectly classifying the foul as a defensive shooting foul. In contrast, SportMV-Agent actively selects the most informative viewpoint ( View 3), capturing the offensive player’s illegal contact with the defender’s neck. By synthesizing this with consistent observations of the defender’s legal verticality and positioning across other views, SportMV-Agentaccurately concludes an offensive foul. 

and minimizes fine-grained confusion, mirroring the sys-tematic observation process of professional referees. 

## E. Future Outlook 

In main paper, we demonstrate that the precise visual per-ception is essential to multi-view sports understanding. However, during our experiments, we observed that the model exhibits notable deficiencies in basic perceptual un-derstanding of sports, even when we only provide a sin-gle favorable camera viewpoint. As illustrated in Fig. 12, MLLM often fails to distinguish between standing tack-les and sliding tackles. This suggests that there remains substantial room to improve the foundational training of MLLMs on perceptual skills, calling for more systematic and fine-grained research in this domain. Moreover, the multi-view setting explored in this work can naturally be extended to a broader range of sports, such as Ameri-can football and volleyball, which feature complex tactical structures and rich multi-agent interactions. However, con-structing and releasing such datasets at scale poses signif-icant challenges, including copyright, privacy, and collec-tion cost. We therefore envision future collaborations with official sports organizations and broadcasters to build high-quality, standardized multi-view sports video benchmarks, and to jointly advance research on multi-view sports video understanding. 14