Title: Faithful Action-unit Causal Reasoning for Counterfactually Faithful Emotion Explanations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15779v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 01:12:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
1

# Faithful Action-unit Causal Reasoning for Counterfactually Faithful Emotion Explanations 

## Van Thong Huynh, Hong Hai Nguyen, Thuy Pham, Trong Nghia Nguyen, and Soo-Hyung Kim 

Abstract —Multimodal models can name the action units (AUs) behind a facial emotion, but their AU →emotion rationales are typically plausible rather than faithful: nothing forces the AUs a model invokes to be the AUs that actually drive its prediction. We cast AU →emotion reasoning as a counterfactual-consistency problem between the rationale, the label, and a structural AU →emotion causal graph G, and propose FACR, which grounds the reasoner in an independently induced, polarity-aware G and trains a counterfactual-faithfulness objective: a do-intervention on an AU that G marks causal for a class must move the prediction, while one it marks irrelevant must leave it unchanged. Faithfulness is thereby both trainable and measurable through a matching interventional metric, which we evaluate against a known causal structure, the PSPI pain-AU composition, as no existing affective-reasoning benchmark allows. We are explicit that this metric tests fidelity to the supplied structure rather than its rediscovery: it asks whether the trained reasoner invokes the AUs the structure marks causal, on held-out subjects and a second dataset. Under subject-independent (leave-one-subject-out) evaluation on UNBC-PAIN, the objective raises the agreement between the invoked AUs and the PSPI composition from a no-objective baseline of 0.08 to 0.57, at a small detection cost (AUC 0.83 to 0.79); an unfaithfulness control attributes the gain to the objective. On a cross-dataset emotion transfer (AffectNet × FABA → Aff-Wild2), the objective likewise raises fidelity to G on a seven-class task (0.50 to 0.84). Agreement with the truly active AUs is a separate, stricter test, and it is bounded by the graph's correctness: with the learned graph it stays at the control level (0.24), and only a verified-graph (EMFACS) variant, corroborated by a corrupted-graph control, raises it to 0.59. Finally, we attach a language verbalizer and extend the audit to the generated text: biasing each action unit's emission by its latent activation makes the rationale faithful by construction, so that ablating an AU removes it from the explanation, a property that transfers to a second language-model backbone, whereas a freely generated rationale is unfaithful. 

Index Terms —Affective computing, facial action units, counterfactual faithfulness, causal graph, explainability, emotion recognition. 

## ✦

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Automatic recognition of facial emotion is a central prob-lem in affective computing, with applications in human– computer interaction, driver monitoring, and health. As these systems move into decision-sensitive settings, a pre-dicted label is no longer sufficient on its own; the system is increasingly expected to explain why an emotion was inferred, in terms a person can check. For facial behavior, the natural vocabulary for such an explanation is the facial ac-tion unit (AU), the elementary muscle movement of the Fa-cial Action Coding System, since specific AU combinations are the physical evidence of an expression. An explanation is useful, however, only when it is faithful, that is, when it reflects the factors that actually drive the prediction, rather than a plausible account that the model did not rely on. Two families of methods connect AUs to emotion, but neither delivers a faithful explanation. Structural-causal methods model AUs and expressions with explicit causal graphs and interventions, and have been used to decon-found subjects [1], debias context [2], and discover directed AU dependencies [3], [4]; nevertheless, they are purely discriminative and expose only a label or an attention map, discarding the recovered structure at inference. Compara-

• Van Thong Huynh and Thuy Pham are with Faculty of CSE, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), VNUHCM, Vietnam. Hong Hai Nguyen is with Dept. of AI, FPT University, Vietnam. Trong Nghia Nguyen is with Faculty of DSAI, College of Technology, National Economic University, Vietnam. Soo-Hyung Kim is with Dept. of AI Convergence, Chonnam National University, South Korea. 

• Corresponding author: Van Thong Huynh. 

tively, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have been adapted to verbalize AU-based emotion rationales [5], [6], [7], [8]; however, the generated text is not constrained by any verified causal structure and is evaluated only for plausibility, so it is often unfaithful, substituting causal attribution with template matching and failing to update under counterfactual edits [9], [10]. Since the explanation and the prediction are produced by decoupled mechanisms, intervening on an AU that is decisive for a class does not reliably change both the rationale and the label together, which is precisely the behavior a trustworthy reasoner should exhibit. In this study, we focus on grounding an MLLM emotion reasoner in a structural AU →emotion causal graph, so that its explanation is counterfactually faithful rather than merely plausible. The proposed system, Faithful Action-unit Causal Reasoning (FACR), can be split into three stages: 1) we induce a directed, polarity-aware AU →emotion causal graph G by independent structure discovery, anchored where ground truth exists by the pain-intensity AU com-position [11]; 2) we condition the reasoner on G, so that the prediction is routed through a disentangled AU latent and the rationale is generated over the graph's nodes and edges; and 3) we introduce a counterfactual-faithfulness ob-jective that applies do-interventions in the AU latent space, requiring the prediction and rationale to change for AUs that G marks causal for a class and to stay invariant for AUs it marks irrelevant. Based on that, the faithfulness of the explanation becomes both trainable, through the objective, 

> arXiv:2606.15779v1 [cs.CV] 14 Jun 2026 2

and measurable, through a matching interventional metric that we evaluate against the known pain AU composition on UNBC-PAIN. The metric tests whether the trained rea-soner is faithful to the supplied structure on held-out data, not whether it rediscovers that structure from scratch; this distinction is what makes the score interpretable, and we return to it in Section 5. We emphasize that the individual ingredients each ap-pear in prior work [4], [8], [12], [13]: an AU-grounded rea-soner, a causal AU graph, and a counterfactual constraint. The contribution of this study is their specific combination in the AU →emotion setting and, in particular, a faithfulness criterion that can be evaluated against a known causal structure, which no existing affective-reasoning benchmark provides. Experimental results on UNBC-PAIN and a cross-dataset emotion transfer to Aff-Wild2 show that the faith-fulness objective substantially increases the agreement be-tween the explanation and the causal graph, and, when the graph is verified, the agreement with the truly active AUs, at a small, quantified cost to detection accuracy. In summary, the main contributions of this study are as follows:  

> •

We formalize the faithfulness gap between structural AU causal models and MLLM emotion reasoning, and cast AU →emotion reasoning as a counterfactual-consistency problem between the rationale, the label, and a causal graph.  

> •

We propose FACR, which grounds the rea-soner in an independently induced, polarity-aware AU →emotion causal graph and enforces faithfulness through do-interventions in a disentangled AU latent space.  

> •

We introduce a counterfactual faithfulness metric for verbalized AU →emotion explanations and evaluate the invoked AUs against the PSPI pain composition on UNBC-PAIN, as a test of fidelity to a known structure rather than its rediscovery.  

> •

We demonstrate that the constraint improves faith-fulness to G on the UNBC-PAIN anchor and a cross-dataset emotion transfer, attribute the gain to the ob-jective with an unfaithfulness control, and show that agreement with the truly active AUs is a separate test bounded by the graph's correctness, improving only when the graph is verified, at a modest, quantified cost to recognition accuracy. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

Two largely separate lines of work connect facial muscle activity to emotion: one recovers an explicit causal structure over action units (AUs) but uses it only for discriminative prediction, and the other emits natural-language emotion explanations but leaves them unconstrained by any verified structure. We review each in turn, then the faithfulness tools our metric builds on, and close with the gap that motivates FACR. 

2.1 Structural causal models for AUs and expressions 

A growing body of work introduces causal structure into AU and facial-expression recognition to remove spurious correlations. In [1], the authors formulated AU recogni-tion as a structural causal model and proposed a plug-in intervention module that deconfounds the subject vari-able through backdoor adjustment. Yang et al. [2] modeled context-aware emotion recognition with a causal graph and debiased the prediction by subtracting the direct context effect, comparing factual and counterfactual outcomes at inference. Tan et al. [3] replaced AU co-occurrence adjacency with a discovered AU causal graph for micro- and macro-expression spotting, which suppressed dataset-biased AU– emotion links, while CoDER [14] learned the temporal-relationship effect of micro-expressions by contrasting fac-tual and counterfactually-revised sequences. Causal reason-ing has likewise been employed for modality debiasing in multimodal emotion recognition [15]. Most relevant to our work, CausalAffect [4] discovered a directed, polarity-aware causal graph over AU →AU and AU →expression dependencies and enforced it through a feature-level coun-terfactual intervention in a disentangled AU latent space. Comparatively, all of these methods are purely discrimina-tive: the recovered structure improves a label or an attention map, and none produces or audits a natural-language expla-nation. 

2.2 Multimodal large language models for emotion rea-soning 

In parallel, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have been adapted to emit natural-language emotion ratio-nales. FEALLM [5] constructed an instruction dataset that aligns facial expressions with AU descriptions and verbal-izes their relationship, and EmoLA [6] instruction-tuned an MLLM for joint emotion and AU recognition, evaluating the generated text with a recognition-plus-generation metric. Emotion-LLaMA [7] and AffectGPT [16] scaled multimodal emotion reasoning with larger instruction corpora, while EMO-LLaMA [17] incorporated AUs at the feature level and XEmoGPT [18] grounded explanations in modality-specific cues. More recent systems tie the reasoning more tightly to AUs: TAG [8] constrained the reasoning steps to AU-related facial regions through a reinforcement reward, and AULLM++ [12] combined an LLM reasoner with a structural AU-graph prior and a counterfactual-consistency regularizer for micro-expression AU detection. Neverthe-less, these systems evaluate their explanations by recogni-tion accuracy or by plausibility, text overlap, a GPT-based judge, or semantic cue matching, rather than by whether the explanation reflects the factors that actually drive the prediction. 

2.3 Faithfulness of explanations 

Whether an explanation is faithful, that is, whether it reflects the model's true reasoning rather than merely a plausible account, is a distinct and well-studied question outside affective computing. Jacovi and Goldberg [10] formalized the faithfulness-versus-plausibility distinction, and Turpin et al. [9] showed that chain-of-thought rationales can be plausible yet unfaithful, shifting under biasing interventions that the explanation never mentions; RFEval [19] further reported that reinforcement-style objectives can reduce rea-soning faithfulness while accuracy holds. A complemen-tary line provides interventional faithfulness criteria that 3

our metric draws on: comprehensiveness and sufficiency through rationale erasure [20], the counterfactual-edit test of Atanasova et al. [21], counterfactual simulatability [22], and counterfactual invariance to irrelevant input changes [23]. For high-level concepts specifically, the causal concept effect [24] measured the do-intervention effect of a concept on a prediction, in contrast to the correlational sensitivity of concept activation vectors [25], and causal mediation analysis [26] distinguished information that merely exists in a representation from information the model actually uses. These ideas were recently extended to vision-language explanations: EDCT [27] audited a vision-language model's natural-language explanation by counterfactual image ed-its, and CC-SHAP [28] measured self-consistency between answer and explanation attributions. Two further connec-tions are worth noting. Predicting a label from intermediate concepts and intervening on those concepts is the concept-bottleneck paradigm [29], [30]; FACR differs in that it audits a verbalized rationale rather than a hard concept vector. Regularizing a model's reasoning to be causally consis-tent has likewise been studied for large-language-model reasoning [13] and for selective rationales [31], and FACR specializes this idea to AU-grounded emotion reasoning, defining both a sensitivity and an invariance arm from a verified causal graph and evaluating it against a known structure. 

2.4 The gap 

Most of the previous studies fall on one side of a divide. Structural-causal methods [1], [2], [3], [4], [14] recover a graph but discard it at inference and never verbalize a ratio-nale, whereas affective MLLMs [5], [6], [7], [8], [16], [17], [18] verbalize a rationale yet leave it unconstrained by a verified structure and evaluate it only for plausibility, text over-lap or a model-based judge. The verbalized AU →emotion reasoning is therefore often unfaithful, substituting causal attribution with template matching and failing to update under counterfactual edits [9], [10]. Closing this gap is non-trivial for two reasons. First, a trustworthy AU →emotion structure is needed, because co-occurrence mappings carry dataset and demographic bias [3]; we therefore induce the graph and anchor it where a ground-truth composition exists. Second, the rationale must be tied to that structure through an interventional signal that makes faithfulness both trainable and measurable [20], [21], rather than scored by surface similarity. The works closest to ours each share one ingredient but not the combination. CausalAffect [4] discovers the causal AU graph and intervenes in an AU latent space, but is discriminative and audits no explanation. AULLM++ [12] pairs an LLM with an AU-graph prior and a counterfactual-consistency regularizer, but the prior is learned rather than verified, the regularizer targets generalization rather than a faithfulness audit, and it generates no rationale. EDCT [27] audits a vision-language explanation by counterfactual edits, but in general visual question answering, without a causal graph and as an evaluation only. Concept-bottleneck models [29], [30] predict from intervenable concepts, but expose a concept vector rather than a verbalized ratio-nale and judge intervention by accuracy gain, not by a sensitivity–invariance signature. To our knowledge, no prior work grounds a natural-language AU →emotion reasoner in a verified causal graph and audits the counterfactual faith-fulness of its explanation against a known structure; this intersection is where FACR sits. We state this as positioning, verified against the recent literature, rather than as a claim of priority for any single mechanism. 

## 3 METHOD 

This section describes the key components of our system in detail. The proposed system, Faithful Action-unit Causal Reasoning (FACR), can be split into three main parts: a structural AU →emotion causal graph, a graph-conditioned reasoner, and a counterfactual-faithfulness objective that couples the reasoner's rationale and prediction to the graph, as illustrated in Figure 1. 

3.1 Overview and notation 

Figure 1 gives an overview. Let an input face be x, with a set of AU nodes A = {a1, . . . , a K } and a set of emotion (and pain) classes C. The structural graph G = ( A ∪ C, E ) is a directed, polarity-aware graph whose edges E are either AU →AU or AU →class; each edge carries a polarity s ∈{− 1, +1 } (excitatory or inhibitory) and a weight. For a class 

c, we write Pa( c) for its direct causal AUs in G. The reasoner maps x to a disentangled AU latent z ∈ RK , one coordinate per AU node, and to a class prediction; z is the structured rationale over which faithfulness is defined. 

3.2 Structural AU →emotion causal graph induction 

We obtain G by independent discovery rather than by reusing an external graph, so the method is self-contained and reproducible. The graph is assembled from three sources, each tagged with its provenance. AU →emotion edges are estimated by an L1-regularized logistic regression of the class label on the AU activations, where a non-zero coefficient yields a directed AU →class edge whose sign defines its polarity; this is fitted on the joint AU–emotion corpus formed by the AffectNet × FABA join, and we note that its AU annotations are model-generated, which we treat as a limitation. AU →AU edges are estimated by neighborhood selection, an L1-logistic regression of each AU on the remaining AUs, on EmotioNet [32], whose AU labels are automatic. The pain sub-structure is fixed from the Prkachin–Solomon pain-intensity (PSPI) formula [11], 

PSPI = AU4+max(AU6 , AU7)+max(AU9 , AU10)+AU43 ,

which provides a verified partial ground truth. Edges that the discovery does not cover are filled from the EMFACS prototypes. As a sanity check on the induced graph rather than as a result, we note that the discovered AU →emotion edges recover EMFACS-consistent structure (for example, happiness ← AU6, AU12; disgust ← AU9, AU10). 

3.3 Graph-conditioned reasoning 

The reasoner is designed so that both the prediction and the natural-language rationale are routed through G. An encoder maps the input to a disentangled AU latent, 4

Face image ResNet-18 encoder 

AU latent 

z

graph-cond. emotion head 

z-gated LM verbalizer 

emotion ˆy

rationale (named AUs) 

causal graph G         

> do( zk=0)
> Fig. 1. FACR overview. A face image is encoded into a disentangled action-unit (AU) latent z; a graph-conditioned head predicts the emotion and a
> z-gated language model verbalizes the rationale over the AUs. The causal graph Gdefines, per class, which AUs are causal. The counterfactual-faithfulness objective requires a do-intervention do( zk=0) on a graph-causal AU to move both the prediction and the rationale, and on an irrelevant AU to leave them unchanged; gating each AU’s emission on zmakes the verbalized rationale faithful by construction.

Algorithm 1 FACR training (staged) 

Require: images x with AU labels a and class labels y;graph G with per-class causal sets Pa( c) and edge polarities sk,c ∈ {− 1, +1 }; weights λa, λ s, λ i; margin 

γ; gate scale β

Stage 1 — graph-conditioned reasoner (encoder fenc +head)  

> 1:

for minibatch (x, a, y ) do  

> 2:

z ← σ(fenc (x)) ▷ AU latent, zk ∈ (0 , 1)  

> 3:

ˆy ← head( z); L ← L cls (ˆ y, y ) + λa Lau (z, a ) 

> 4:

for class c, AU ak do ▷ do-interventions in the AU latent  

> 5:

ˆy do( zk =0) ← head( z with zk:=0)  

> 6:

if ak ∈ Pa( c) then  

> 7:

L += λs

γ − sk,c (ˆ yc − ˆy do( zk =0)  

> c

) 

> +

▷

sensitivity  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

L += λi (ˆ yc − ˆy do( zk =0)  

> c

)2 ▷ invariance  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

update fenc , head by ∇L  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

freeze fenc , head 

Stage 2 — z-gated verbalizer (soft prompt + AU-token embeddings)  

> 15:

for minibatch (x, a, y ) do  

> 16:

z ← σ(fenc (x)) ▷ no gradient to the encoder  

> 17:

bias each AU token’s logit by β min( zk − 12 , 0) ▷

suppress inactive AUs  

> 18:

generate the rationale; set its stated emotion to 

arg max c ˆyc 

> 19:

update the soft prompt and AU-token embeddings by ∇L lm  

> 20:

end for 

z = σ(fenc (x)) , (1) where σ is the sigmoid and each coordinate zk ∈ (0 , 1) is the presence of AU ak; this latent is the interpretable interface at which interventions act, since removing AU ak is the well-defined operation do( zk = 0) . Conditioned on z and on the graph, the reasoner produces two coupled outputs: a class prediction ˆy, and a rationale r that names the active AUs, follows their AU →class edges in G, with the edge polarity stating whether each AU supports or opposes the class, and concludes with the predicted emotion. Specifi-cally, the reasoner is conditioned on the active AUs and their incident graph edges, so the rationale is generated over the structure rather than alongside it; faithfulness is then defined on this rationale together with the label (Section 3.4). In the minimal instantiation used for the latent-level audit (Sections 4.1–4.4), the natural-language reasoner is replaced by a lightweight class head on the same AU latent z, and the faithfulness objective is applied unchanged; because the objective depends only on z and ˆy, it transfers directly to the full reasoner. 

3.4 Counterfactual-faithfulness objective 

The central idea is that, under a do-intervention on an AU, the prediction and the rationale must change together and consistently with G. We define two terms. The sensitivity term requires that removing an AU that G marks causal for the target class c move the class logit in the polarity-implied direction, 

Lsens = mean  

> ak∈Pa( c)

 γ − sk,c 

 ˆyc − ˆy do( zk =0) 

> c

  

> +

, (2) where sk,c is the edge polarity, γ the margin, and [·]+ the hinge. The invariance term requires that removing an AU that is irrelevant to c leave the class logit unchanged, 

Linv = mean  

> ak/∈Pa( c)

 ˆyc − ˆy do( zk =0) 

> c

2. (3) The full objective adds these to the recognition loss and an AU-grounding loss, 

L = Lcls + λaLau + λsLsens + λiLinv , (4) where Lcls is the cross-entropy on the class, Lau is the binary cross-entropy that grounds the AU latent z in the AU labels, and λa, λ s, λ i weight the terms. We use the direct causal set Pa( c) rather than the transitive closure, so that the learned, and necessarily noisy, AU →AU edges do not contaminate a class's causal set; in particular the pain class retains exactly the PSPI AUs. Algorithm 1 summarizes the full procedure, including the staged verbalizer training introduced in Section 4.5. 5

3.5 Faithfulness metric 

We report faithfulness with two interventional scores that mirror the objective. The counterfactual sensitivity is the fraction of (sample, causal-AU) pairs for which the do-intervention moves the target logit in the polarity-implied direction, and the counterfactual invariance is the fraction of (sample, irrelevant-AU) pairs for which the target logit stays within a tolerance ε. Both are reported in [0 , 1] , higher is better. On UNBC-PAIN we additionally report the agree-ment between the AUs the reasoner invokes and the PSPI composition, which grounds the metric against a known structure. 

## 4 EXPERIMENTS 

4.1 Dataset and metric 

We evaluate FACR on the UNBC-McMaster Shoulder Pain Expression Archive [33], which provides 48,398 facial frames from 25 subjects, each frame annotated with the Prkachin and Solomon Pain Intensity (PSPI) score and its constituent action units [11]. UNBC-PAIN is our faithfulness anchor: the PSPI score is defined as a fixed composition of six AUs, so the AUs that should drive a pain prediction are known a priori, which is what lets us measure whether the reasoner is faithful to a ground-truth causal structure and not merely accurate. We treat pain detection as a binary task, labeling a frame positive when PSPI > 0. Under this binarization the data are highly imbalanced: only 17.3% of frames are positive, and the positive rate varies widely across subjects, from 0% to 61.6%. We use leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) cross-validation, holding out one subject for testing and training on the remaining 24, so that no subject, session, or frame crosses the train–test boundary. One subject (subject 101) contains no PSPI-positive frames; for that fold the pain-class F1, AUC, and PSPI agreement are undefined, and we there-fore exclude it from those three averages (n = 24), while accuracy and the faithfulness scores, which are defined over all frames, retain the full set (n = 25). We report the mean 

± standard deviation across the held-out subjects, and we repeat every configuration over three seeds to confirm that the reported effects are not seed artifacts. For pain detection we use accuracy, the area under the ROC curve (AUC), and the F1 score of the positive class; AUC is the primary detection metric, since accuracy is un-informative under this degree of imbalance and the F1 score at a fixed threshold is sensitive to the per-subject base rate. For faithfulness we report the counterfactual sensitivity and counterfactual invariance defined in Section 3.5, together with the PSPI agreement, the overlap between the AUs the reasoner invokes for a pain prediction and the six AUs that compose the PSPI score. To our knowledge, the PSPI agreement is the only faithfulness measure in this domain with a ground-truth causal target. 

4.2 Implementation 

The image encoder, ResNet-18 [34], maps each aligned face crop to the AU-latent z, on top of which the graph-conditioned pain head and the faithfulness terms operate. We train with Adam at a learning rate of 1e-3 and a batch size of 256. The grounding and sensitivity weights are fixed at λa = 1 .0 and λs = 0 .5, and we vary the invariance weight 

λi ∈ { 2, 4, 8} as reported below. As an unfaithfulness con-trol, we also train an identical model with the faithfulness terms removed ( λs = λi = 0 ), which retains the encoder and the AU grounding but drops the counterfactual objective. For the verbalized reasoner (Section 4.5), the AU la-tent additionally conditions a small decoder-only language model, Qwen3.5-0.8B [35] by default, through a learned soft prompt of eight tokens. We add one special token per AU and bias each AU token's logit by its latent activation zk, so an inactive AU cannot be named; the language-model body is frozen and only the soft prompt and the new AU-token embeddings are trained, in a second stage on top of the converged encoder. Generation is greedy with a repetition penalty and a no-repeat-n-gram constraint, and the stated emotion is set to the head's prediction. The backbone is a configuration argument, which we vary in Section 4.6. 

4.3 Results and discussion 

Resolution sharpens faithfulness, not accuracy. We first vary the temporal sampling of the training frames. As shown in Table 1, moving from a strided sample (every fourth frame) to the full-resolution set raises the PSPI agreement substantially, from 0.188 to 0.660, while the detection AUC stays essentially unchanged at about 0.79. Denser super-vision does not make FACR a better pain detector, but it markedly sharpens which AUs the model uses to reach its decision. Faithfulness and accuracy therefore behave as distinct axes here, and a model can become more faithful without becoming more accurate, a first indication that the faithfulness score is not a proxy for detection. Recovering invariance. At full resolution the two faith-fulness terms initially move in opposite directions: the coun-terfactual sensitivity rises, but the counterfactual invariance drops to 0.318, which indicates that the reasoner has become more reactive to AUs that are irrelevant to pain. We attribute this to an under-weighting of the invariance term, whose gradient is diluted as the denser data inflate the recognition and sensitivity losses. Increasing λi from 2 to 8 recovers the invariance from 0.318 to 0.907 (paired Wilcoxon, p = 6e-8), while the PSPI agreement decreases only marginally over the same seed, from 0.660 to 0.611, a change that is not statistically significant (p = 0.079). Both halves of the faithfulness objective are thus satisfied at once, and the residual decline in PSPI agreement is within noise. Attributing the gain to the objective. To test whether the structural alignment is produced by the faithfulness objective rather than by the encoder or the AU grounding, we compare FACR against the unfaithfulness control ( λs =

λi = 0 ). Significance is assessed on the held-out subject as the independent unit: the per-subject value is averaged across the three seeds first, then compared with a paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Holm-corrected across the metric family), so the reported p-values are not inflated by treating seed repetitions as independent draws. Without the objec-tive the PSPI agreement is only 0.081 (the invoked AUs rarely coincide with the PSPI set), against 0.569 for FACR (n = 24 subjects, p = 2e-5); the counterfactual invariance and sensitivity fall correspondingly (Table 1). The faithfulness 6                                                                                                       

> TABLE 1 UNBC-PAIN faithfulness under subject-independent LOSO. PSPI agreement is the overlap between the invoked AUs and the verified PSPI composition; Sens./Inv. are the counterfactual faithfulness scores. Mean ±std across held-out subjects (pooled over 3 seeds for the operating point and control); the spread is subject-driven (per-subject pain base rate 0–61.6%), while the across-seed deviation is ≤0.04 .
> Setting PSPI agr. Sens. Inv. AUC Pain F1 Acc. FACR (stride 4) 0.188 ±0.192 0.477 ±0.185 0.564 ±0.119 0.788 ±0.152 0.328 ±0.246 0.743 ±0.196
> FACR (stride 1, λi=2 )0.660 ±0.238 0.658 ±0.241 0.318 ±0.171 0.789 ±0.135 0.307 ±0.226 0.820 ±0.121
> FACR (stride 1, λi=4 )0.639 ±0.229 0.642 ±0.219 0.489 ±0.252 0.791 ±0.150 0.366 ±0.252 0.823 ±0.152
> FACR (stride 1, λi=8 )0.569 ±0.214 0.589 ±0.221 0.911 ±0.083 0.794 ±0.133 0.371 ±0.226 0.819 ±0.144
> no-faith control 0.081 ±0.134 0.431 ±0.192 0.607 ±0.061 0.828 ±0.133 0.375 ±0.244 0.830 ±0.149

objective is therefore responsible for the alignment. The gain does carry a small detection cost: the control reaches an AUC of 0.828 against 0.794 for FACR (p = 0.021), a relative decrease of about 4%. We read this as a favorable trade: a roughly sevenfold increase in structural faithfulness for a four-percent reduction in AUC, the expected faithfulness– accuracy trade-off. We report the cost rather than claim it is absent. Operating point. Based on that, we fix λi = 8 and report this configuration over three seeds in Table 1: accuracy 0.819 ± 0.144, AUC 0.794 ± 0.133, counterfactual sensitivity 0.589 ± 0.221, counterfactual invariance 0.911 ± 0.083, and PSPI agreement 0.569 ± 0.214. The full resolution and λi

sweep in Table 1 is a sensitivity analysis: the operating point follows a principled criterion, the smallest λi at which both faithfulness terms hold, rather than tuning on a separate validation split. Because UNBC-PAIN is small we did not hold out validation subjects, so this setting should be read as fixed a priori and supported by the sweep, not as a value selected to maximize a test metric; the small across-seed deviation below indicates it is not over-fit to a single run. The dispersion reported here and in Table 1 is across held-out subjects, and is large because the per-subject pain base rate itself ranges from 0% to 61.6%, so a subject with few positive frames yields a high-variance per-fold score; it is not run-to-run instability. The complementary across-seed deviation, how much each per-subject mean moves when only the seed changes, is small for every metric ( ≤

0.04), which confirms that the effect itself is stable and the spread is a property of the subject population rather than of training. The PSPI agreement of 0.569 is well above the strided baseline but remains moderate, indicating that the reasoner recovers most, though not all, of the PSPI composition; we attribute the residual gap to the noise in the learned AU grounding and leave a tighter alignment to future work. 

4.4 Cross-dataset emotion transfer 

We next ask whether the faithfulness objective generalizes beyond the pain anchor to multi-class emotion, and whether the structural alignment it produces survives a cross-dataset shift. We train the reasoner on the AffectNet × FABA join (AffectNet images with their emotion labels, grounded in the action units FABA annotates), and evaluate, without adaptation, on the held-out Aff-Wild2 expression set [36], [37]. The label space is the seven canonical classes (Neu-tral and the six basic emotions); “Other” and AffectNet's “contempt” are dropped, as neither has a defined AU com-position in G. Because Aff-Wild2 is used only for testing, no subject or frame crosses the train–test boundary. EmotioNet supplies the AU →AU structure of G but, since its AU and emotion labels are disjoint image sets, cannot itself provide joint supervision; we therefore state the training domain as AffectNet × FABA rather than EmotioNet. We report emotion macro-F1 and, as the faithfulness measure, the graph-causal agreement, the overlap between the AUs the reasoner invokes for a class and the AUs G marks causal for it, which is the multi-class analogue of the PSPI agreement. The objective induces faithfulness to G across datasets. As shown in Table 2, the objective raises the graph-causal agreement from 0.50 to 0.84 (FACR vs. the λs = λi = 0 

control), a large and low-variance gain that mirrors the PSPI result on UNBC. The mechanism transfers: on a second dataset and a seven-way task, the trained reasoner invokes the action units the graph deems causal. The corrupted-graph control makes this concrete: a model trained on a graph whose class-to-AU rows are permuted is faithful to that graph (0.71 agreement with the permuted structure) but not to the true G (0.44). The objective thus enforces faithful-ness to whatever structure it is given, which is the behavior a graph-grounded method should exhibit and which pre-empts the concern that the graph plays no functional role. Ground-truth alignment tracks graph quality. The pic-ture changes when agreement is measured against the action units actually active in each frame rather than against G.With the AU →emotion edges learned from FABA's GPT-4V-derived AU annotations, which are themselves noisy, FACR's agreement (0.24) is no higher than the control's (0.27): although the reasoner faithfully follows G, G's learned structure does not match the AUs truly present on Aff-Wild2. The graph-causal agreement above inherits this dependence: it scores fidelity to a structure that rests on those pseudo-labels, which is why the verified graph is needed to connect faithfulness to reality. We therefore replace the learned emotion edges with the verified EM-FACS prototypes [38], the emotion analogue of the PSPI composition used for pain, keeping everything else fixed. Agreement with the AUs actually active in each frame then rises from 0.24 to 0.59 (Table 2), at no cost to recognition (macro-F1 unchanged at 0.22). Faithfulness to G had held all along; making G correct is what makes that faithfulness reflect reality. The objective and a correct graph are complementary. The two factors interact in the expected way. With the verified graph the objective raises ground-truth agreement above the control (0.59 vs. 0.50), whereas with the noisy graph it does not (0.24 vs. 0.27): forcing faithfulness onto 7                                                                           

> TABLE 2 Cross-dataset emotion transfer (AffectNet ×FABA →Aff-Wild2), 3 seeds. Graph-causal agreement is faithfulness to G(recall of G’s causal AUs); active-AU agreement is the fraction of the invoked AUs that are truly active (a precision), so the two columns are comparable across rows. The objective induces faithfulness to G; a verified graph is needed for that to reflect the true AUs. EmoLA is a published affective MLLM evaluated on the same frames; we score its named AUs (it exposes no intervention handle). It names 4.5 AUs/frame, so it recovers more truly-active AUs by recall (0.52 vs. 0.37) but less precisely: FACR with the verified Gleads on both faithfulness ( 0.74 vs. 0.63 ) and precision ( 0.59 vs. 0.51 ), whereas with the learned Gits precision (0.24) falls below EmoLA’s; see Section 4.4 for the per-class breakdown.
> Setting Graph-causal agr. Active-AU agr. Macro-F1 Acc. FACR (learned G)0.839 ±0.029 0.238 ±0.030 0.219 ±0.033 0.368 ±0.095
> no-faith 0.501 ±0.008 0.266 ±0.045 0.182 ±0.017 0.278 ±0.043
> corrupted G0.443 ±0.037 0.184 ±0.018 0.240 ±0.008 0.391 ±0.016
> FACR (verified G, EMFACS) 0.741 ±0.020 0.585 ±0.010 0.212 ±0.016 0.344 ±0.058
> EmoLA (FABA) 0.627 0.511 ––

a correct structure improves alignment with reality, while forcing it onto a wrong one cannot. This is the same logic the UNBC anchor exhibits with verified PSPI, now demonstrated on multi-class emotion, and it reconciles the corrupted-graph control: the method is faithful to whatever graph it is given, so the graph's correctness sets the ceiling on how well that faithfulness reflects reality. The graph-quality effect itself, however, is unambiguous across seeds: every verified-graph run lies in [0.575, 0.594] active-AU agreement, above every run of every other con-dition (at most 0.309 for the control), so the per-seed ranges do not overlap. With only three seeds a paired significance test is underpowered, its smallest attainable two-sided p-value is 0.25, so we summarize the effect by these non-overlapping per-seed bands and a large standardized effect size (Cohen's d ≈ 10 for the verified graph over the control) rather than by a p-value. We nonetheless report this arm as preliminary: the recognition numbers carry non-trivial seed variance (macro-F1 0.22 ± 0.03) and the reasoner is minimal. It establishes the mechanism, its dependence on graph quality, and that a verified graph closes the gap, not a state-of-the-art recognition result. A published affective MLLM detects AUs well but names them without causal selectivity. To position FACR against prior work on the same axis, we evaluate EmoLA [6], a released instruction-tuned affective MLLM that emits both an emotion and the action units it deems present, on the same Aff-Wild2 frames, run from its public weights (in 4-bit, with the released landmark front-end) so the comparison is reproducible. EmoLA emits free-text AU names rather than the precision and recall reported here, so we compute those from its named set against G exactly as we score FACR's invoked AUs. EmoLA lists 4.5 action units per frame, so its recall of the truly-active AUs is higher (0.52 vs. 0.37), as expected from a model trained for AU detection. On the two measures that matter for a faithful explanation, however, FACR with the verified graph leads: it is more faithful to the emotion's causal structure (graph-causal agreement 0.74 vs. 0.63) and more precise, a larger fraction of the AUs it invokes are actually active (0.59 vs. 0.51). This lead is contingent on graph quality, and we state it as such: with the learned graph FACR's precision falls to 0.24, below EmoLA's, so the comparison sets FACR's verified-graph configuration against EmoLA and isolates the value of pairing the objective with a correct structure rather than claiming an unconditional win. EmoLA reaches its recall by naming many AUs indiscriminately rather than by selecting the ones the graph deems causal; FACR invokes exactly the graph-causal count and is right more often (Table 3 shows representative cases). The pattern is consistent across emotions (Table 4): FACR leads on faithfulness and precision for every class, while both models are weakest on the rare classes (disgust, fear), where the graph and the labels are thinnest. Moreover, EmoLA exposes no intervention handle, so this static naming agreement is the only faithfulness measure available for it: the counterfactual sensitivity and invariance FACR reports cannot be computed for a model whose explanation cannot be perturbed. A model can thus see the action units accurately yet still not explain through the causal structure: the plausibility-without-faithfulness pattern the paper targets, now observed in a published reasoner rather than argued in the abstract. Sections 4.1–4.4 audit the AU latent z; Section 4.5 extends the audit to the verbalized explanation that FACR ultimately targets. 

4.5 Verbalized-rationale faithfulness 

The experiments so far audit the disentangled AU latent. FACR's claim, however, concerns a verbalized rationale (the action units a model names when it explains an emotion), so we now attach a language verbalizer to the reasoner and audit the text it generates. The verbalizer is conditioned on the AU latent z and emits a short rationale that names the invoked AUs (Section 4.2). We evaluate it on the held-out Aff-Wild2 set with a rationale counterpart of the in-terventional metric. The rationale sensitivity is the fraction of causal-AU interventions for which ablating zk removes the corresponding AU from the generated text; the rationale invariance is the fraction of irrelevant-AU interventions that leave the rationale's causal AUs in place. A faithful rationale must be constrained, not merely trained. We first observe that a verbalizer trained to name the active AUs is not faithful: under intervention it removes the ablated AU from its rationale only 6% of the time, be-cause it generates the AU mentions from co-occurrence and label priors rather than from z. This is exactly the plausible-but-unfaithful behavior the paper targets, now reintroduced by the verbalization layer. We therefore make the rationale faithful by construction: biasing each AU token's emission by zk so that an inactive AU is strongly suppressed from being named (Section 4.2). With this constraint, ablating a causal zk reliably drops the corresponding AU from the 8  

> TABLE 3 Qualitative FACR vs. EmoLA on representative Aff-Wild2 frames (faces omitted; the dataset depicts identifiable people). FACR invokes exactly the action units its prediction depends on (the graph-causal set); EmoLA names a longer list that mixes causal AUs with non-causal ones (red). Both predict the correct emotion, but FACR’s explanation is precise and EmoLA’s is plausible-but-imprecise, the gap the faithfulness objective targets. Examples are representative (EmoLA names 4.5 AUs/frame on average), not selected for EmoLA’s worst behavior.

Example Ground-truth active AUs FACR: invoked AUs → emotion EmoLA: named AUs → emotion (a) Happi-ness 

AU6 , AU12 , AU25 AU6 , AU12 → happiness AU6 , AU12 , AU25 , AU26 → happi-ness (b) Anger AU4 , AU7 , AU23 ,

AU24 , AU25 AU4 , AU5 , AU7 , AU23 , AU24 →

anger 

AU4 , AU9 , AU10 , AU17 , AU23 →

anger (c) Surprise AU1 , AU2 , AU25 ,

AU26 AU1 , AU2 , AU5 , AU26 → sur-prise 

AU1 , AU2 , AU4 , AU5 , AU25 , AU26 

→ surprise                                                              

> TABLE 4 Per-emotion AU agreement, FACR (verified EMFACS graph) vs. the published EmoLA, on the shared Aff-Wild2 frames. Faith. = recall of G’s causal AUs (faithfulness to G); Active = recall of the truly-active AUs; Prec. = fraction of invoked/named AUs that are active. FACR with the verified graph leads on faithfulness and precision across emotions; EmoLA’s higher active recall comes from naming more AUs (4.5/frame). Both are weakest on the rare classes (disgust, fear), whose counts are small ( n≤24 for fear) and whose graph and data are thinnest, so their per-class values are indicative only.
> Emotion nFaith. FAct. FPrec. FFaith. EAct. EPrec. E
> Happiness 2883 0.77 0.34 0.78 0.78 0.55 0.66
> Surprise 552 0.75 0.45 0.54 0.54 0.43 0.41
> Sadness 478 0.70 0.35 0.30 0.62 0.56 0.30
> Anger 400 0.78 0.63 0.55 0.35 0.38 0.33
> Disgust 187 0.64 0.07 0.08 0.39 0.49 0.24
> Fear 24 0.55 0.37 0.10 0.65 0.74 0.15
> Overall 4524 0.75 0.37 0.59 0.63 0.52 0.51

text. The constraint is the verbalized analogue of the do-intervention, and it is what makes the rationale audit mean-ingful rather than vacuous. The verbalized explanation is counterfactually faithful. On Aff-Wild2 the verbalizer attains, over five seeds, a ratio-nale sensitivity of 0.62 ± 0.07 and a rationale invariance of 0.64 ± 0.11, at a recognition macro-F1 of 0.20 ± 0.02 (Table 5). The seed spread does not shrink as seeds are added (it is the same at three and five seeds), so it reflects the small templated verbalizer rather than sampling noise; a stronger verbalizer is the route to a tighter estimate. The gate does not by itself produce this score: it suppresses naming an inactive AU and thereby lets an ablation drop a named AU, but the residual gap to a perfect score reflects that an AU must first be named for its ablation to register, a property of the small templated verbalizer, not of the constraint. Two design choices are needed to reach this. First, training the verbalizer jointly with the reasoner degrades recognition, because the language loss pulls z away from the representation the emotion head relies on; we therefore use a staged schedule: the encoder and emotion head are trained first and then frozen, and only the verbalizer is trained on top, which keeps macro-F1 at its Section 4.4 level while the rationale becomes faithful. Second, the stated emotion is set to the model's predicted class rather than generated freely, so the rationale's conclusion is faithful to the prediction by con-struction. A typical rationale reads: “the face shows AU26, AU12, and AU24; these are characteristic of happiness”; Figure 2 illustrates the evaluation, in which intervening on a graph-causal AU drops it from the generated text. We report this as a small language model, a templated rationale, 

Rationale (from z): “The face shows ⟨AU6 ⟩ ⟨ AU12 ⟩; these are characteristic of happiness .” 

Counterfactual do(AU12=0) : “The face shows ⟨AU6 ⟩; . . . ”

— ⟨AU12 ⟩ is no longer named and the prediction shifts. 

> Fig. 2. The rationale-faithfulness audit (Section 4.5). Because each action unit’s emission is gated on its latent activation, intervening on a graph-causal AU removes it from the generated rationale and moves the prediction, while an irrelevant AU leaves the rationale’s causal AUs in-tact. The example uses the EMFACS happiness prototype (AU6, AU12); the rationale is a representative output of the small templated verbalizer used in this study.

and AffectNet × FABA as the verbalization-training source, and so do not claim fluent open-ended reasoning; what it establishes is that the AUs a FACR explanation names are the AUs that drive its prediction. 

4.6 Backbone ablation 

To test whether faithfulness comes from the gating mech-anism or from a particular language model, we swap the verbalizer backbone from Qwen3.5-0.8B to Gemma 3 1B [39], keeping everything else fixed. The faithful-by-construction constraint transfers: under a single-run gate test, ablating 

zk removes the AU from the rationale at comparable rates for both backbones (Qwen 0.77, Gemma 0.79), indicating that the mechanism is not specific to one language model; we report these as single-run feasibility probes rather than seeded means. The coverage of the verbalization, however, is not: under the shared training recipe Gemma matches the recognition accuracy (the encoder is frozen and shared) and is faithful on the frames it does verbalize, but it more 9                  

> TABLE 5 Verbalized-rationale faithfulness and backbone ablation on Aff-Wild2, with a frozen-reasoner baseline. For FACR the columns are rationale sensitivity/invariance; for the frozen reasoner they are the model-agnostic simulatability sensitivity/invariance. FACR’s faithfulness is enforced by construction: the gate strongly suppresses naming an inactive AU, which is what lets an ablation drop it.
> Method Sensitivity Invariance Macro-F1 FACR-v1 (Qwen3.5-0.8B) 0.615 ±0.065 0.637 ±0.107 0.203 ±0.017
> FACR-v1 (Gemma 3 1B) 0.929 0.586 0.228
> Frozen reasoner (Qwen3.5-0.8B) 0.574 0.722 –

often emits an empty rationale, where Qwen verbalizes reliably. We attribute this to the weaker response of the frozen Gemma to soft-prompt steering, which a small emis-sion incentive or light adapter tuning would address. We therefore use Qwen3.5-0.8B as the primary verbalizer and report Gemma as a robustness check: the faithfulness mech-anism is backbone-agnostic, while verbalization fluency and coverage remain backbone-dependent. 

4.7 Comparison to a frozen reasoner 

Section 4.4 already compares FACR to a published affec-tive MLLM (EmoLA [6]) on the agreement axis. A direct interventional comparison, however, is not available. The closest method, CausalAffect [4], shares the intervention mechanism (a feature-level counterfactual in a disentangled AU latent) but is discriminative and exposes no verbal-ized rationale, so the explanation audit that is our subject has nothing to score, and we are not aware of a public release that would permit even a latent-level comparison; the structural baseline's code is likewise unreleased [3], and the affective MLLMs [6], [12] expose no AU latent, so our 

z-intervention cannot be applied to them, which is itself the point we return to below. As a controlled stand-in we audit a frozen instruct language model given the same AU evidence FACR's z encodes, presented as text, using the model-agnostic counterpart of our metric: we remove one action unit from the evidence and re-query, and measure whether the prediction changes consistently with G.The frozen reasoner is moderately self-consistent (sim-ulatability sensitivity 0.57 and invariance 0.72 on Aff-Wild2, Table 5), comparable to FACR's verbalized ratio-nale (0.62 / 0.64). We interpret this straightforwardly: lo-cal self-consistency on text counterfactuals is attainable without any faithfulness mechanism, so FACR's contribu-tion is not a larger self-consistency. It is, rather, twofold. First, FACR's faithfulness is enforced by construction: at the latent level the intervention moves the prediction in essentially every case (sensitivity ≈ 1.0), and the gate strongly suppresses naming an inactive AU, whereas the frozen model's consistency is incidental and uncontrolled, with no such constraint. Second, FACR audits the whole image →AU →emotion path, whereas the frozen reasoner is handed the action units and offers no intervention point at which image-grounded faithfulness could even be tested. No prior affective reasoner exposes such a handle; provid-ing an auditable one is part of what FACR contributes. We therefore present this as a controlled comparison on the faithfulness axis, not a recognition leaderboard, on which a small graph-constrained model is not expected to lead. 

4.8 Ablation: noisy out-of-domain AU supervision 

A natural way to improve the AU latent is to add more AU supervision, but we find that its quality matters more than its quantity. EmotioNet supplies automatic (algorithm-predicted) AU labels for a large, diverse face set, an obvious candidate for extra grounding. Grounding the latent on these labels, however, lowers both faithfulness and recog-nition at every weight we tried: over three seeds, active-AU precision falls from 0.59 to 0.55 and graph-causal agreement from 0.74 to 0.65, as the noisy, out-of-domain labels pull the latent off the emotion-discriminative manifold. This is why the reasoner is grounded on the cleaner AffectNet ×

FABA labels rather than on EmotioNet directly, a choice the ablation turns from a convenience into an evidence-based decision. 

## 5 DISCUSSION 

Taken together, the experiments support a single claim: grounding an AU →emotion reasoner in a verified causal graph and training a counterfactual objective makes its explanation faithful. They also clarify what that claim does and does not entail. We draw out four points. Faithfulness and accuracy are distinct axes, and trade off in a controlled way. Across both the UNBC anchor and the emotion transfer, the objective markedly raises struc-tural faithfulness (PSPI agreement 0.08 to 0.57; graph-causal agreement 0.50 to 0.84) for a modest, explicitly reported drop in detection (UNBC AUC 0.83 to 0.79). The strided-versus-full-resolution result on UNBC makes the separation explicit: denser supervision sharpens which AUs drive the decision without moving AUC. A model can therefore be made more faithful without being made more accurate, which is precisely why faithfulness needs to be measured on its own terms rather than read off accuracy. Faithfulness to the graph is necessary but not sufficient; the graph's correctness sets the ceiling. The corrupted-graph control shows the objective enforces faithfulness to what-ever structure it is given, and the EMFACS result shows that this faithfulness reflects the truly active AUs only when the structure is verified (active-AU precision 0.24 to 0.59). We are explicit about one consequence for interpretation: on the anchors, the objective's causal set and the evaluation's target set are the same verified composition (the PSPI AUs, the EMFACS prototypes), so the agreement metric is a test that the trained faithfulness generalizes to held-out subjects and a second dataset, not a claim that the method rediscovers structure it was not given. The honest reading is that FACR is faithful to a structure that must be supplied and verified, and that the natural next step is to improve how that 10 

structure is discovered, so that faithfulness to G more often coincides with faithfulness to reality. Detecting action units is not the same as reasoning through them. The comparison to EmoLA, a released affec-tive MLLM, brings this out. EmoLA is the stronger raw AU detector, with higher recall of the active AUs, yet it is less faithful to the emotion's causal structure and less precise, because it names many AUs indiscriminately rather than selecting the causal ones (Table 4). This is the plausibility-without-faithfulness gap observed in a deployed system: an explanation can name the right vocabulary and still not reflect the factors that drive the prediction. FACR's contri-bution is not better AU detection but an explanation whose named AUs are the ones its prediction actually depends on, together with an intervention handle on which that dependence can be audited. Faithfulness is most robust when it is enforced by con-struction rather than learned. The verbalizer makes this concrete. A model trained to name the active AUs freely re-moves an ablated AU from its rationale only 6% of the time, whereas gating each AU's emission on its latent activation removes that AU whenever it is ablated (Section 4.5), and this constraint transfers to a second backbone (Section 4.6). The same lesson appears in the latent: adding noisy, out-of-domain AU supervision (automatic EmotioNet labels) de-grades it rather than enriching it (Section 4.8). In this setting faithfulness is bought by constraining the explanation to the verified structure, not by adding model capacity or data, and that is the design principle FACR embodies. 

## 6 LIMITATIONS 

Several limitations bound the present study. First, the con-tribution is faithfulness, not recognition: FACR's detection accuracy is modest (UNBC AUC about 0.79; cross-dataset emotion macro-F1 about 0.22), and a graph-constrained model is not expected to lead a recognition leaderboard. Sec-ond, the cross-dataset reasoner is trained on the AffectNet 

× FABA join rather than on EmotioNet directly. This is by design: EmotioNet's action-unit and emotion labels are dis-joint image sets, and its AU labels are algorithm-predicted, which the Section 4.8 ablation shows degrades rather than enriches the latent. The “EmotioNet domain” therefore en-ters through the graph and the AU vocabulary rather than through AU supervision. Third, the AU →emotion graph is induced from GPT-4V-derived FABA annotations and is consequently noisy; as Section 4.4 shows, faithfulness to 

G reflects the truly active AUs only when G is verified (PSPI, EMFACS), so the method is only as good as its graph. Fourth, the interventions are performed in the disentangled AU latent and, outside UNBC, audit presence-level rather than graded-intensity AU changes; a pixel-level counterfac-tual is left to future work. Fifth, the verbalizer is a small (0.8B) language model producing a templated rationale, so we establish the faithfulness mechanism rather than fluent open-ended reasoning, and the verbalized arm uses three seeds with a single backbone per setting. Finally, because no prior affective reasoner exposes an intervention handle, our external comparison is a controlled frozen-reasoner proxy on the faithfulness axis rather than a head-to-head recognition benchmark. 

## 7 CONCLUSION 

This paper introduced FACR, a faithful action-unit causal reasoner that grounds an AU →emotion model in a struc-tural causal graph G and trains a counterfactual-faithfulness objective coupling the prediction and the rationale to G. The objective is designed to make the explanation faithful by construction, a do-intervention on a graph-causal AU must move the prediction, while one on a graph-irrelevant AU must leave it unchanged, and the matching interventional metric makes that faithfulness measurable against a known causal structure, as a test of fidelity to that structure rather than of its rediscovery. The experimental results confirm that the objective produces faithfulness to G on both the UNBC-PAIN anchor and a cross-dataset emotion transfer to Aff-Wild2, that an unfaithfulness control attributes the effect to the objective, and that the alignment between the model's reasoning and the truly active AUs is bounded by the correctness of the graph, high for the verified PSPI and EMFACS structures, limited for noisily learned edges. Therefore FACR offers a route to explanations that are con-strained, not merely plausible, in AU →emotion reasoning. We further extend the audit from the disentangled AU latent to a verbalized rationale, where gating each action unit's emission on its latent activation constrains the generated explanation by construction, a property that transfers to a second language-model backbone. Two directions follow directly: improving the learned AU →emotion graph so that faithfulness to G more often coincides with faithfulness to the ground truth, and scaling the verbalizer beyond the small backbone and templated rationale used here toward fluent, open-ended reasoning. 

## REFERENCES                  

> [1] Y. Chen, D. Chen, T. Wang, Y. Wang, and Y. Liang, “Causal inter-vention for subject-deconfounded facial action unit recognition,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 1, 2022, pp. 374–382. [2] D. Yang, K. Yang, M. Li, S. Wang, S. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Robust emotion recognition in context debiasing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 12 447–12 457. [3] P.-S. Tan, S. Rajanala, A. Pal, R. C.-W. Phan, and H.-F. Ong, “Causal-ex: Causal graph-based micro and macro expression spot-ting,” Pattern Recognition Letters , 2025. [4] G. Hu, T. Lian, D. Kollias, O. Celiktutan, and X. Yang, “Causalaf-fect: Causal discovery for facial affective understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00456 , 2025. [5] Z. Hu, K. Yuan, X. Liu, Z. Yu, Y. Zong, J. Shi, H. Yue, and J. Yang, “Feallm: Advancing facial emotion analysis in multimodal large language models with emotional synergy and reasoning,” in
> Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia ,2025, pp. 5677–5686. [6] Y. Li, A. Dao, W. Bao, Z. Tan, T. Chen, H. Liu, and Y. Kong, “Facial affective behavior analysis with instruction tuning,” in European Conference on Computer Vision .Springer, 2024, pp. 165–186. [7] Z. Cheng, Z.-Q. Cheng, J.-Y. He, J. Sun, K. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Lian, X. Peng, and A. G. Hauptmann, “Emotion-llama: multimodal emotion recognition and reasoning with instruction tuning,” in
> Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024, pp. 110 805–110 853. [8] H. Lin, T. Bai, J. Zhang, X. Chang, S. Lu, F. Gu, Z. Hu, and W. Zhang, “Tag: Thinking with action unit grounding for facial expression recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.18763 , 2026. [9] M. Turpin, J. Michael, E. Perez, and S. R. Bowman, “Language models don’t always say what they think: unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting,” in Proceedings of the 37th Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023, pp. 74 952–74 965. 11

[10] A. Jacovi and Y. Goldberg, “Towards faithfully interpretable nlp systems: How should we define and evaluate faithfulness?” in 

Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computa-tional linguistics , 2020, pp. 4198–4205. [11] K. M. Prkachin and P. E. Solomon, “The structure, reliability and validity of pain expression: Evidence from patients with shoulder pain,” Pain , vol. 139, no. 2, pp. 267–274, 2008. [12] Z. Liu, K. Yuan, B. Zhao, H. Ma, and Z. Yu, “Aullm++: Structural reasoning with large language models for micro-expression recog-nition,” 2026. [13] S. Akter, I. F. Shihab, and A. Sharma, “Causal consistency regular-ization: Training verifiably sensitive reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01544 , 2025. [14] Y. Li, M. Liu, L. Lao, Y. Wang, and Z. Cui, “Counterfactual discriminative micro-expression recognition,” Visual Intelligence ,vol. 2, no. 1, p. 29, 2024. [15] J. Kim, J. Hong, and Y. Choi, “Causal inference for modality debiasing in multimodal emotion recognition,” Applied Sciences ,vol. 14, no. 23, p. 11397, 2024. [16] Z. Lian, H. Chen, L. Chen, H. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Ren, Z. Cheng, B. Liu, R. Liu, X. Peng et al. , “Affectgpt: A new dataset, model, and benchmark for emotion understanding with multimodal large language models,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning . ML Research Press, 2025. [17] B. Xing, Z. Yu, X. Liu, K. Yuan, Q. Ye, W. Xie, H. Yue, J. Yang, and H. K¨ alvi¨ ainen, “Emo-llama: Enhancing facial emotion under-standing with instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11424 ,2024. [18] H. Zhang, Y. Liu, P. Jiang, L. Junjie, X. Jun, Y. He, Y. Deng, S. Du, and Q. Liu, “Xemogpt: An explainable multimodal emotion recognition framework with cue-level perception and reasoning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05496 , 2026. [19] Y. Han, Y. Lee, and J. Do, “RFEval: Benchmarking reasoning faithfulness under counterfactual reasoning intervention in large reasoning models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. [20] J. DeYoung, S. Jain, N. F. Rajani, E. Lehman, C. Xiong, R. Socher, and B. C. Wallace, “Eraser: A benchmark to evaluate rationalized nlp models,” in Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the associa-tion for computational linguistics , 2020, pp. 4443–4458. [21] P. Atanasova, O.-M. Camburu, C. Lioma, T. Lukasiewicz, J. G. Simonsen, and I. Augenstein, “Faithfulness tests for natural lan-guage explanations,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,2023, pp. 283–294. [22] Y. Chen, R. Zhong, N. Ri, C. Zhao, H. He, J. Steinhardt, Z. Yu, and K. Mckeown, “Do models explain themselves? counterfactual simulatability of natural language explanations,” in International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2024, pp. 7880–7904. [23] V. Veitch, A. D’Amour, S. Yadlowsky, and J. Eisenstein, “Counter-factual invariance to spurious correlations: why and how to pass stress tests,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021, pp. 16 196–16 208. [24] Y. Goyal, A. Feder, U. Shalit, and B. Kim, “Explaining classifiers with causal concept effect (cace),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07165 ,2019. [25] B. Kim, M. Wattenberg, J. Gilmer, C. Cai, J. Wexler, F. Viegas et al. ,“Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav),” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2018, pp. 2668–2677. [26] J. Vig, S. Gehrmann, Y. Belinkov, S. Qian, D. Nevo, S. Sakenis, J. Huang, Y. Singer, and S. Shieber, “Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp: The case of gender bias,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12265 , 2020. [27] S. Ding, S. Vasa, and A. Ramadwar, “Explanation-driven counter-factual testing for faithfulness in vision-language model explana-tions,” in NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Regulatable ML , 2025. [28] L. Parcalabescu and A. Frank, “Do vision & language decoders use images and text equally? how self-consistent are their explana-tions?” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 21 634–21 663. [29] P. W. Koh, T. Nguyen, Y. S. Tang, S. Mussmann, E. Pierson, B. Kim, and P. Liang, “Concept bottleneck models,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 5338–5348. [30] G. Dominici, P. Barbiero, F. Giannini, M. Gjoreski, G. Marra, and M. Langheinrich, “Counterfactual concept bottleneck models,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 5184–5207. [31] M. Treviso, A. Ross, N. M. Guerreiro, and A. F. Martins, “Crest: A joint framework for rationalization and counterfactual text gener-ation,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2023, pp. 15 109– 15 126. [32] C. Fabian Benitez-Quiroz, R. Srinivasan, and A. M. Martinez, “Emotionet: An accurate, real-time algorithm for the automatic annotation of a million facial expressions in the wild,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2016, pp. 5562–5570. [33] P. Lucey, J. F. Cohn, K. M. Prkachin, P. E. Solomon, and I. Matthews, “Painful data: The unbc-mcmaster shoulder pain expression archive database,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG) . IEEE, 2011, pp. 57–64. [34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778. [35] Q. Team, “Qwen3.5: Accelerating productivity with native multimodal agents,” February 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5 [36] D. Kollias and S. Zafeiriou, “Expression, affect, action unit recog-nition: Aff-wild2, multi-task learning and arcface,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04855 , 2019. [37] D. Kollias, P. Tzirakis, A. Cowen, S. Zafeiriou, I. Kotsia, E. Granger, M. Pedersoli, S. Bacon, A. Baird, C. Gagne et al. , “Advancements in affective and behavior analysis: The 8th abaw workshop and competition,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 2025, pp. 5572–5583. [38] P. Lucey, J. F. Cohn, T. Kanade, J. Saragih, Z. Ambadar, and I. Matthews, “The extended cohn-kanade dataset (ck+): A com-plete dataset for action unit and emotion-specified expression,” in 

2010 ieee computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition-workshops . IEEE, 2010, pp. 94–101. [39] G. Team, “Gemma 3,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786