Title: An Empirical Study on Learning Latent Representations for Emotional Speech Synthesis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14922v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 00:17:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
# An Empirical Study on Learning Latent Representations for Emotional Speech Synthesis 

Dang Quang Vinh 

Aimesoft JSC Hanoi, Vietnam 

vinhdq@aimesoft.com 

Ngo Quang Huy 

Aimesoft JSC Hanoi, Vietnam 

huynq@aimesoft.com 

Abstract 

For the last couple of years, the field of speech synthesis has improved dramatically thanks to deep learning. There are more and more deep learning-based TTS systems developed to make it possible to produce voices with high intelligi-bility and naturalness. Meanwhile, controlling the expressiveness is yet a big deal, generat-ing speech in different styles or manners has received a lot of attention from community re-cently. This paper aims to give our solutions to deal with the task emotional speech synthesis (ESS) at VLSP 2022 which allows to generate humanlike natural-sounding voice from a given input text with desired emotional expression. By integrating speaker embedding, prosody bottleneck into FastSpeech 2, our systems can promisingly generate emotional speech of a single speaker (Sub-task 1), transfer speaking styles from another speaker to the target speaker with neutral non-expressive data while retain-ing the target speaker’s identity (Sub-task 2). 

1 Introduction 

Speech synthesis, also known as Text to speech (TTS), which aims to synthesize intelligible and natural speech from text (Taylor, 2009), plays a vi-tal role in speech interaction systems, and can be widely applied in human communication (Adler and Rodman). With the rise of deep learning, TTS has thrived exponentially and become more hu-manlike, current state of the art synthesizers still struggle to create speech as natural as possible but emotion simulation is not a self-evident feature. Lately, a very large amount of research work has come out focusing on every aspect of speech syn-thesis. Little work has been conducted that utilizes latent spaces to model the variability in speech of different styles or different emotions. An issue for such a control perhaps lies in the complexity of human vocal expression. For more than a decade now, tons of attempts to add emotion effects to syn-thesized speech have been made, which are based on old synthesis methods namely formant synthe-sis (Burkhardt and Sendlmeier, 2000; Burkhardt), diphone concatenation (Vroomen et al., 1993; Edg-ington, 1997; Heuft et al., 1996), unit selection (Iida et al., 2000; Marumoto and Campbell, 2000). To promote research in emotional speech synthe-sis and related areas, VLSP 2022, the International Workshop on Vietnamese Language and Speech Processing, devotes task Emotional Speech Syn-thesis. The aim of the task is to build TTS sys-tems that generate expressive speech. The task consists of 2 sub-tasks: synthesizing emotional speech of a single speaker given emotional train-ing dataset, synthesizing emotional speech of an-other speaker, whose training dataset is neutral non-expressive data, provided dataset from the first sub-task (speaker adaptation). Numerous methods have been developed to deal with the emotional speech synthesis (both single speaker and and speaker adaptation). Most of them leverage latent embedding spaces integrated into end-to-end neural TTS frameworks that can be Global Style Tokens combined with Tacotron in the early days of neural TTS (Wang et al., 2018) or recent variants of learning embedding space of prosody (Pan and He, 2021) combined with frame-works such as Tacotron 1/2, FastSpeech 2 (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Lee and Kim, 2019; Klimkov et al., 2019). The prosody bottleneck builds up the kernels accounting for speaking well, and disentan-gles the prosody from content and speaker timbre, therefore guarantees high quality speaker adapta-tion. We empirically verify the effectiveness of the proposed method on the training dataset of VLSP 2022 Task Emotional Speech Synthesis. In spite of late evaluation from the organizers, synthesized audios show that our method is totally potential 

> arXiv:2606.14922v1 [cs.SD] 12 Jun 2026

when they satisfy requirements of affective expres-sion: understandable, natural-sounding and clearly expressive. 

2 Proposed Methods 

2.1 Data Preprocessing 

After receiving two datasets VLSP-EMO and VLSP-NEU from the organizers, we performed some tests and found quite many problems from them, especially VLSP-EMO. As the dataset VLSP-EMO was collected from films and interviews, it contains a lot of noise, back-ground music, and sometimes voices from other people or even "different voices" of a single speaker due to recording conditions (e.g. film versus inter-view). We employ Facebook Denoiser (Defossez et al., 2020), an encoder-decoder based architec-ture with skip-connections that can remove various kinds of background noise and room reverb, to first enhance the audio quality. Besides, the provided text transcripts include some English words (e.g. me too, resort,..) and ty-pos. We fixed the typos and splitted the English words into similarly-pronounced syllables in Viet-namese (e.g. mi tu, ri sọt,..). Another problem is that there was a portion of audio files that were incorrectly transcribed. To resolve this, we used an Automatic Speech Recog-nition (ASR) tool to transcribe the audio files then compared the results with ground-truth transcripts using Character Error Rate (CER), filtered out and corrected the text labels with high CER. Finally, we resampled all the audio files to the rate of 22050 Hz and removed ones that we con-sidered unintelligible. 

2.2 Model Architecture 

In both sub-tasks, we used FastSpeech 2 (Ren et al., 2020) with some modifications as the acoustic model. FastSpeech 2 was proved to generate speech significantly faster than previous auto-regressive models with comparable quality. It also provides further controllability on pitch, energy and dura-tion, which are the key factors in expressive speech synthesis. Our model takes as input a sequence of phones (phonemes) and produces spectrogram in log-mel scale. Similar to (Ren et al., 2020), we also used Montreal Forced Aligner (McAuliffe et al., 2017) tool to extract the phoneme duration for training. 

> Figure 1: The architecture for sub-task 1

We utilized a pre-trained HiFi-GAN (Kong et al., 2020) V1 variation as the vocoder to synthesize final waveform from Mel-spectrogram. 

2.2.1 Sub-task 1 – ESS with a single speaker 

In sub-task 1, based on FastSpeech 2 we simply added a kind of emotion embedding - a look-up table that maps from an emotion id to a fixed-length vector. The emotion vector is broadcast-added with the output of the encoder. The result then goes through the rest of the architecture and ends up as emotional Mel-spectrogram. The proposed structure is illustrated in Figure 1. 

2.2.2 Sub-task 2 – ESS with speaker adaptation 

As inspired by (Pan and He, 2021), we expanded FastSpeech 2 with speaker and emotion embed-dings, both of which are just look-up tables as used in sub-task 1. Following (Pan and He, 2021), the speaker em-bedding is first broadcast-concatenated with the output of the encoder, the result of which is then projected back to the original embedding size. The emotion embedding is passed through a linear layer with tanh activation to a vector of the same dimen-sion as encoder output, then added to the previ-ous speaker-combined encoder output. The encoder output containing speaker and emotion informa-tion is referred to as speaker-emotion-combined en-coder output. This encoder output afterward flows through a "prosody bottleneck" as in (Pan and He, 2021), added back to the previous speaker-emotion-combined output via residual connection. The re-sult of these above operations is hereafter fed to the Variant adaptor, then Decoder to finally generate target Mel-spectrogram. We believed that the use of prosody bottleneck would retain the emotional information which helps in transferring emotion from source speaker to tar-get speaker without losing the target speaker’s tim-bre. The proposed structure is illustrated in Figure 2. 

> Figure 2: The architecture for sub-task 2

3 Experiments and Results 

3.1 Datasets 

Conforming to the organizer’s regulations, we used only two provided datasets, VLSP-EMO and VLSP-NEU. After the preprocessing, we achieved 3.8 and 11.89 hours of speech audio of VLSP-EMO and VLSP-NEU, respectively. The use of these two datasets was as follows: 

• Sub-task 1: we used all data from VLSP-EMO for training. 

• Sub-task 2: we combined VLSP-EMO and VLSP-NEU to form a large dataset and used it for training. 

3.2 Training Strategy 

For both sub-tasks we used the same training con-figuration. The modified FastSpeech 2 was trained from scratch for 40000 steps with batch size of 16. The used optimizer was Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .98 , ϵ = 10 −9.We started training with 3000 warm-up steps then annealed the learning rate after milestone steps of 5000, 9000, 17000 with the rate of 0.3. It took about an hour and more than 3 hours of training time on a GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti to create usable models for the two sub-tasks respectively. 

3.3 Experimental Results 

Our systems achieved the following results accord-ing to the organizers’ announcement: 

Sub-task 1 

• Naturalness Test: MOS = 2.719 / 5. 

• Intelligibility Test (SUS): Syllable Error Rate = 72.40%. 

Sub-task 2 

• Naturalness Test: MOS = 1.622 / 5. 

• Intelligibility Test (SUS): Syllable Error Rate = 64.80%. 

• Speaker Similarity: Similarity Score = 1.543 / 4. 

4 Conclusion 

We have presented our empirical study of learning latent representations for emotional speech synthe-sis task at VLSP 2022. By applying various latent embedding spaces, synthesized audios show that our method is a favourable approach to the bench-mark dataset of VLSP 2022 TTS. Without using any external source, our method is straightforward to adapt to other languages. We plan to investi-gate latent space representations for other speech synthesis tasks, including multilingual speech syn-thesis and adaptive speech synthesis, among others. 

References   

> Ronald Brian Adler and George R Rodman. Under-standing human communication , volume 10. Felix Burkhardt. Simulation emotionaler sprechweise mit sprachsyntheseverfahren. Felix Burkhardt and Walter F Sendlmeier. 2000. Veri-fication of acoustical correlates of emotional speech using formant-synthesis. In ISCA Tutorial and Re-search Workshop (ITRW) on speech and emotion .

Alexandre Defossez, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. 2020. Real time speech enhancement in the wave-form domain. In Interspeech .Mike Edgington. 1997. Investigating the limitations of concatenative synthesis. In Eurospeech .Barbara Heuft, Thomas Portele, and Monika Rauth. 1996. Emotions in time domain synthesis. In 

Proceeding of Fourth International Conference on Spoken Language Processing. ICSLP’96 , volume 3, pages 1974–1977. IEEE. Akemi Iida, Nick Campbell, Soichiro Iga, Fumito Higuchi, and Michiaki Yasumura. 2000. A speech synthesis system with emotion for assisting commu-nication. In ISCA tutorial and research workshop (ITRW) on speech and emotion .Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 .Viacheslav Klimkov, Srikanth Ronanki, Jonas Rohnke, and Thomas Drugman. 2019. Fine-grained robust prosody transfer for single-speaker neural text-to-speech. In Interspeech 2019, 20th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Associ-ation, Graz, Austria, 15-19 September 2019 , pages 4440–4444. ISCA. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020. Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for effi-cient and high fidelity speech synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:17022– 17033. Younggun Lee and Taesu Kim. 2019. Robust and fine-grained prosody control of end-to-end speech syn-thesis. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-cessing (ICASSP) , pages 5911–5915. IEEE. T Marumoto and N Campbell. 2000. Control of speak-ing types for emotion in a speech re-sequencing sys-tem. In Proc. of the Acoustic Society of Japan, Spring meeting 2000 , pages 213–214. Michael McAuliffe, Michaela Socolof, Sarah Mihuc, Michael Wagner, and Morgan Sonderegger. 2017. Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech Alignment Using Kaldi. In Proc. Interspeech 2017 ,pages 498–502. Shifeng Pan and Lei He. 2021. Cross-speaker style transfer with prosody bottleneck in neural speech synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12562 .Yi Ren, Chenxu Hu, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2020. Fastspeech 2: Fast and high-quality end-to-end text to speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04558 .RJ Skerry-Ryan, Eric Battenberg, Ying Xiao, Yuxuan Wang, Daisy Stanton, Joel Shor, Ron Weiss, Rob Clark, and Rif A Saurous. 2018. Towards end-to-end prosody transfer for expressive speech synthesis with tacotron. In international conference on machine learning , pages 4693–4702. PMLR. Paul Taylor. 2009. Text-to-speech synthesis . Cambridge university press. Jean Vroomen, René Collier, and Sylvie JL Mozzi-conacci. 1993. Duration and intonation in emotional speech. In Eurospeech .Yuxuan Wang, Daisy Stanton, Yu Zhang, RJ-Skerry Ryan, Eric Battenberg, Joel Shor, Ying Xiao, Ye Jia, Fei Ren, and Rif A Saurous. 2018. Style tokens: Unsupervised style modeling, control and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5180–5189. PMLR.