Title: ChronoSC: Task-Oriented Semantic Communication via Temporal-to-Color Encoding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16388v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 00:04:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# ChronoSC: Task-Oriented Semantic Communication via Temporal-to-Color Encoding 

Phuc H. Nguyen 1, Trung T. Nguyen 1, Quy N. Duong 1, and Van-Dinh Nguyen 2

> 1

Smart Green Transformation Center (GREEN-X), VinUniversity, Vietnam. 

> 2

School of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland E-mails: {23phuc.nh, 22trung.nt, 23quy.dn }@vinuni.edu.vn, dinh.nguyen@tcd.ie 

Abstract —Semantic communication (SC) aims to reduce trans-mission overhead by conveying task-relevant information rather than raw data. However, existing SC approaches for video largely focus on pixel-level reconstruction or rely on complex spatiotem-poral pipelines, leading to excessive bandwidth usage and latency that are unsuitable for low-resource deployments. In this paper, we propose ChronoSC, a task-oriented semantic communication framework for Video Question Answering (VideoQA). ChronoSC introduces Chrono-Color Stacking, a lightweight and lossless projection scheme that encodes temporal video dynamics into a single static image, enabling extreme temporal compression before transmission. This compact semantic representation is transmitted using a lightweight Deep Joint Source-Channel Coding (DeepJSCC) transceiver and explicitly reconstructed at the receiver. Unlike latent-space methods, explicit visual recon-struction enables the direct reuse of pre-trained vision-language models; specifically, a pre-trained BLIP model is employed to infer answers from noisy, reconstructed chrono-images. Experi-ments on the CLEVRER dataset show that ChronoSC achieves up to 192 times bandwidth reduction compared to raw video transmission while maintaining high VideoQA accuracy. 

Index Terms —Semantic communication, video question an-swering, video compression, joint source-channel coding. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Video data currently dominates global internet traffic, driven by the rapid proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) devices, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and autonomous systems. In many emerging applications, such as intelligent traffic monitoring, surveillance, and hazard detection, the primary objective is no longer to deliver visually appealing video streams for human consumption. Instead, the goal is for machines to extract actionable intelligence directly from visual data, such as object attributes, motion patterns, or causal events [1]. Despite this shift toward machine-centric video analytics, transmitting video from edge devices to a central server remains fundamentally challenging. In particular, two key constraints limit the practicality of large-scale deployments. First, transmitting full video sequences requires high data rates that often exceed the capacity of edge and wireless networks. Second, conventional video coding standards (e.g., H.264/AVC and H.265/HEVC) suffer from the well-known “cliff effect” [2], where even a modest degradation in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can cause catastrophic decoding failure, rendering the received video unusable for downstream analysis. These challenges expose a fundamental mismatch between traditional video communication systems, designed primarily for human viewing, and the requirements of machine-oriented inference tasks. To address this gap, semantic communication (SC) has emerged as a promising paradigm that aims to trans-mit only task-relevant semantic information rather than raw pixel data [3]. While recent works, such as VideoQA-SC [4], have extended SemCom to video-based reasoning tasks, they typically rely on complex spatiotemporal processing pipelines built on 3D convolutional networks, object detectors, or graph-based reasoning modules [5], [6]. Such architectures introduce substantial computational overhead and latency, making them impractical for resource-constrained edge devices. Building on this insight, we propose ChronoSC, an ultra-low-complexity video semantic communication framework for VideoQA. ChronoSC introduces Chrono-Color Stacking, a parameter-free projection method that deliberately leverages fundamental arithmetic operations (e.g., background subtrac-tion and progressive hue shifting) to achieve near-zero compu-tational overhead. By explicitly encoding temporal dynamics into spatial color trails within a single RGB image, we create a compact semantic representation that bypasses the need for intensive feature extraction at the edge. This rep-resentation is transmitted using the proposed Motion-Aware Swin Transceiver (MAST), a deep joint source-channel cod-ing architecture that prioritizes dynamic regions for robust transmission. Unlike latent-space methods, MAST explicitly reconstructs a pixel-domain semantic image at the receiver, enabling direct reuse of pre-trained vision-language models, such as BLIP [7], to infer answers from noisy reconstructions without retraining the transmitter. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose ChronoSC, an ultra-lightweight projection scheme that compresses temporal video dynamics into a single static image. Unlike existing methods relying on heavy deep learning backbones, our parameter-free design eliminates the need for spatiotemporal feature extraction, resulting in near-zero computational overhead (measured in FLOPs) suitable for extreme edge deploy-ments.  

> •

We develop a modular semantic interface via the pro-posed MAST transceiver. By introducing a motion-aware gating mechanism, MAST explicitly prioritizes dynamic 

> arXiv:2605.16388v1 [cs.CV] 11 May 2026

regions for robust transmission. Furthermore, its pixel-domain reconstruction explicitly decouples the commu-nication module from downstream reasoning models, enabling the ”plug-and-play” reuse of Foundation Models (e.g., BLIP).  

> •

Experimental results on the CLEVRER dataset [8] demonstrate that ChronoSC achieves a massive 192 ×

bandwidth reduction compared to raw video transmission. Remarkably, under extreme channel noise (SNR = 0 dB), ChronoSC maintains a high VQA accuracy of 76 .2% ,significantly outperforming conventional digital codecs (H.264 + LDPC) which suffer from the cliff effect and drop to 35 .2% .II. R ELATED WORK 

Traditional communication systems follow a strict sepa-ration between source coding for compression and channel coding for error protection. Deep joint source-channel coding (DeepJSCC) replaces this modular design with neural net-works trained end-to-end, enabling more efficient and robust transmission over wireless channels. Bourtsoulatze et al. [9] first demonstrated that CNN-based JSCC can effectively miti-gate the cliff effect in wireless image transmission. Building on this idea, SwinJSCC [10] incorporates Swin Transformers to better capture global contextual information, further improving reconstruction quality and robustness. These advances high-light the effectiveness of transformer-based JSCC for image transmission, which we adopt and extend in this work. Unlike conventional communication systems that aim for faithful signal reconstruction, task-oriented semantic com-munication focuses on maximizing the performance of adownstream task, such as classification or Visual Question Answering (VQA). MU-DeepSC [11] jointly encodes image and text semantics for VQA but is limited to static images and does not address temporal dynamics in video. VideoQA-SC [4] extends semantic communication to video but relies on computationally intensive spatiotemporal encoders that com-bine object detection, temporal modeling, and graph neural networks. In contrast, our approach shifts complexity away from the network architecture toward the data representation itself. By encoding temporal dynamics into a compact 2D Chrono-Color image, we enable the use of lightweight image-based models rather than heavy video processing pipelines. Representing motion within a single image has been ex-plored in computational photography and computer vision. Yosef et al. [12] used coded exposure to enable video recon-struction from a single motion-blurred image, while VDM-MD [13] employed diffusion models to resolve temporal ambiguity from blurred inputs. These methods, however, are designed for high-fidelity video reconstruction for human viewing. In contrast, our work is fundamentally task-oriented: we do not seek to reconstruct the original video, but instead treat the stacked image as a semantic symbol that directly encodes motion information for machine interpretation. III. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION 

Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed end-to-end SC framework for ChronoSC, designed for Video Question Answering (VQA) at the network edge. The system consists of a semantic trans-mitter, a wireless channel, and a semantic receiver, and aims to efficiently transmit task-relevant visual semantics under bandwidth and channel constraints. 

Transmitter : The input is a video sequence V ∈ RT ×3×H×W ,where T denotes the number of frames, and H and W

represent the spatial height and width, respectively. Instead of transmitting the full video, the transmitter first extracts a compact semantic representation and then encodes it: 1) Semantic projection: A projection function P(·) com-presses the video into a single static semantic rep-resentation Isem and simultaneously extracts a binary motion mask M ∈ { 0, 1}H×W : (Isem , M) = P(V). The semantic image encodes temporal dynamics, while the motion mask identifies spatial regions associated with motion. 2) Motion-aware encoding: The semantic image Isem is encoded into a sequence of k complex channel symbols 

Z ∈ Ck using the MAST encoder fθ (·), which leverages the motion mask to prioritize dynamic regions: Z =

fθ (Isem , M). The transmitted symbols are normalized to satisfy the average power constraint: 1 

> k

E[∥Z∥2] ≤ 1.

The channel model : The modulated symbols Z are transmit-ted over a wireless fading channel. The received signal ˆZ ∈ Ck

is modeled as: ˆZ = h · Z + n, where h represents the channel coefficient and n ∼ CN (0 , σ 2I) denotes the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) with noise power σ2.

Receiver : The receiver infers the correct answer A directly from the noisy received symbols ˆZ in two sequential stages: 1) Visual reconstruction: The MAST decoder gϕ(·) first reconstructs a pixel-domain semantic image: ˆIsem =

gϕ(ˆZ).

2) Semantic inference: The reconstructed image is passed to a VQA model Mψ (·) (e.g., BLIP) together with the question Q, to predict the answer: ˆA = Mψ (ˆIsem , Q ).

The problem formulation : ChronoSC seeks to maximize VQA accuracy while minimizing bandwidth usage. We define the Bandwidth Compression Ratio (BCR) as BCR = kT × H × W × 3 . (1) To enable modularity and reuse of pre-trained vision-language models, training is decoupled into two sub-problems: 1) Reconstruction fidelity (MAST): The MAST en-coder–decoder pair is trained to minimize a motion-weighted reconstruction distortion between the original and reconstructed semantic images: 

min  

> θ,ϕ

E

h

∥Isem − ˆIsem ∥2 ⊙ (1 + αM)

i

, s.t. BCR ≤ γ

(2) where α weights the motion importance and γ is the bandwidth constraint. Pretrained   

> BLIP Answer Encoder
> Transmitter
> Stacked Image
> Decoder
> Reconstructed
> Channel
> HN
> Receiver
> Question
> Input Video
> Chrono
> stacking
> Power Allocation
> Motion mask

Fig. 1: End-to-end SC framework for ChronoSC, where the input video is compressed into a single stacked semantic image and transmitted for VideoQA inference. 

Algorithm 1 Chrono-Color Stacking with Motion Extraction                                                

> Input: Input Video V∈RT×3×H×W.1: Step 1: Background Modeling
> 2: Fbg ←Mean t(V);3: Ffg ← | V−Fbg |;4: Step 2: Motion Mask Generation
> 5: M←Max t(Mean c(Ffg )) > τ ▷Thresholding with τ
> 6: Step 3: Chrono-Color Encoding
> 7: for t←1to Tdo
> 8: θt←tT·θmax ;9: F′
> t←HueRotate (Ffg [t], θ t);10: end for
> 11: Isem ←max t(F′);12: Output : Stacked Image Isem , Motion mask M.

2) Task adaptation (VLM): Independently, the VQA model is trained on clean semantic images to minimize the cross-entropy loss: 

min  

> ψ

LCE (Mψ (Isem , Q ), A gt ) (3) where Agt is the ground-truth answer. By applying the Chrono-Color projection P(·), the source dimension is reduced by a factor of T prior to JSCC encoding, enabling extreme compression while preserving task-critical temporal semantics. IV. T HE PROPOSED CHRONO SC F RAMEWORK 

A. Semantic Encoder: Chrono-Color Stacking 

The core component of ChronoSC is the Chrono-Color Stacking semantic encoder, which compresses a video se-quence into a single static image. Unlike traditional video codecs that rely on computationally expensive motion estima-tion (e.g., optical flow) or deep 3D convolutional networks, Chrono-Color Stacking employs a parameter-free, arithmetic-based projection that collapses the temporal dimension of length T into the color space. This results in an extreme 

T : 1 compression ratio while preserving task-critical temporal semantics through chromatic encoding. The procedure consists of three steps, summarized in Algorithm 1. 

1) Adaptive background subtraction: To isolate dynamic content from static redundancy, we first estimate the back-ground frame as the temporal mean of the input video V =

{F1, F 2, . . . , F T }. The foreground motion features are then extracted via element-wise absolute difference: 

Fbg = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

Ft, Ffg ,t = |Ft − Fbg |. (4) This operation acts as a lightweight motion-attention mech-anism that suppresses static background regions while high-lighting moving objects, which are typically most informative for VideoQA tasks. The use of simple arithmetic operations ensures low computational overhead, making the approach suitable for embedded and edge devices. We note that this background subtraction assumes a stationary camera, which is common in edge surveillance and monitoring scenarios. In cases involving camera motion (e.g., UAV platforms), global motion compensation could be applied as a preprocessing step. 

2) Temporal-to-Chromatic mapping (Hue Shift): To encode temporal order into the spatial domain, we introduce a differ-entiable Hue Shift operator H(·). Each foreground frame is assigned a hue rotation angle 

θt = tT · θmax . (5) The frame Ffg ,t is transformed from the RGB color space to the YIQ color space, rotated around the luminance (Y) axis to preserve brightness while shifting chromaticity, and then mapped back to RGB: 

F ′ 

> t

= H(Ffg ,t , θ t). (6) 

3) Max Projection Aggregation: Finally, to compress the sequence into a single semantic symbol Isem ∈ R3×H×W , we apply a max projection operator along the temporal dimension. Specifically, for each channel c and spatial location (h, w ), the value is computed as: 

Isem [c, h, w ] = max   

> t∈{ 1,...,T }

(F ′ 

> t

[c, h, w ]) . (7) Unlike average pooling, which causes motion blur, this pixel-wise maximization preserves the high-frequency details and peak intensity of the moving object trails. The resulting Isem 

is a standard RGB image that compactly encodes object trajectories, motion direction, and visual attributes, serving as a task-relevant semantic symbol for downstream transmission and inference. B. Robust Transmission: Motion-Aware Swin Transceive 

To reliably transmit the semantic image over noisy wireless channels, we propose MAST. Unlike conventional DeepJSCC schemes that allocate channel resources uniformly across the image, MAST explicitly prioritizes motion-relevant regions using the motion mask produced by Chrono-Color Stacking. 

1) The MAST architecture: MAST extends SwinJSCC by incorporating a parallel motion guidance branch. The encoder consists of two streams:  

> •

Content stream: A Swin Transformer encoder extracts latent features Fcontent ∈ RC× H   

> 16 ×W
> 16

. 

> •

Guidance stream: A lightweight convolutional encoder processes the binary motion mask M to generate a spatial attention map Amotion .

2) Motion-aware feature modulation: The motion mask is first downsampled to match the spatial resolution of the latent features and then projected into the channel dimension using a 1 × 1 convolution followed by a sigmoid activation: 

Amotion = σ



Conv 1×1

 Downsample (M)

(8) yielding an attention map Amotion ∈ [0 , 1] C× H   

> 16 ×W
> 16

.To prioritize motion-relevant regions, the content features are modulated using a residual gating mechanism: 

Fmod = Fcontent ⊙ (Amotion + ϵ) (9) where ϵ ensures a minimum bandwidth allocation for static regions, while regions with strong motion cues receive pro-portionally higher transmission capacity. 

3) Transmission and reconstruction: The modulated la-tent features are power-normalized and transmitted over the wireless channel. At the receiver, a Swin Transformer–based decoder reconstructs the semantic image ˆIsem from the noisy channel output. The transceiver is trained end-to-end using a motion-weighted reconstruction loss: 

L = Lmse (Isem , ˆIsem ) ⊙ (1 + αM) (10) where the weighting factor α emphasizes reconstruction fi-delity in dynamic regions that are critical for semantic reason-ing. 

C. Semantic Decoder: Task-Oriented VQA 

ChronoSC adopts a strictly task-oriented design in which the receiver directly performs reasoning on the reconstructed semantic image rather than attempting to recover the original video. To this end, we employ a pre-trained BLIP vision-language model as the semantic decoder. BLIP consists of a Vision Transformer encoder that extracts visual features from the reconstructed image ˆIsem and a text decoder that generates an answer given a question Q:

A = BLIP (ˆIsem , Q ). (11) To preserve modularity and enable reuse of foundation models, training is decoupled into two stages. The MAST transceiver is first trained to robustly transmit Chrono-Color images 

Algorithm 2 Decoupled Training Strategy for ChronoSC                                                                                                      

> Input: Video dataset D={(Vi, Q i, A i)}Ni=1 , pre-trained BLIP Minit .
> Output: Optimized MAST parameters (θ∗, ϕ ∗), and fine-tuned VLM ψ∗.
> Stage 1: Train MAST for Semantic Reconstruction
> 1: Objective: Learn to transmit Chrono-Color images robustly.
> 2: for epoch = 1 to E1do
> 3: for each batch Vin Ddo
> 4: (Isem ,M)← P (V);▷Generate Stacked Image 5: Z←fθ(Isem ,M);▷Motion-Aware Encoding 6: ˆZ←Channel (Z,SNR train );
> 7: ˆIsem ←gϕ( ˆZ);▷Reconstruction 8: Lrec ← ∥ Isem −ˆIsem ∥2⊙(1+αM);9: Update MAST params θ, ϕ ←Optimizer (Lrec );10: end for
> 11: end for Stage 2: Train BLIP on Chrono-Color Domain
> 12: Objective: Teach BLIP to understand ”Time-to-Color” mapping.
> 13: Initialize VLM Mψ← M init ;14: for epoch = 1 to E2do
> 15: for each batch (V, Q, A )in Ddo
> 16: (Isem ,M)← P (V)▷Use clean Stacked Image 17: Predict answer: ˆA← M ψ(Isem , Q );18: Lcontent ←CE ( ˆA, A );19: Update VLM params ψ←Optimizer (Lcontent );20: end for
> 21: end for — Inference Phase —
> 22: Transmit: VP
> −→(Isem ,M)MAST
> −−−→ˆIsem ;23: Reason: ˆA=Mψ∗(ˆIsem , Q );24: Return θ∗, ϕ ∗, ψ ∗.

under varying channel conditions, after which BLIP is fine-tuned on clean Chrono-Color images to learn the mapping from chromatic motion cues to temporal semantics. During inference, the transmitter and receiver operate independently, and the fine-tuned BLIP model directly infers answers from noisy reconstructed semantic images. The full training and inference pipeline is summarized in Algorithm 2. V. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

Dataset: We evaluate ChronoSC on the CLEVRER dataset [8], a diagnostic benchmark designed for video-based causal and physical reasoning. Our experiments focus on the Descriptive question subset, which assesses a model’s ability to perceive object attributes (e.g., color, shape, and material) as well as motion dynamics such as direction and velocity. All videos are processed at a resolution of 256 ×256 .

Implementation details and hyperparameters: The pro-posed framework is implemented in PyTorch and trained on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. Training follows the decoupled strategy described in Section IV.  

> •

1) MAST training (Stage 1): Trained for 50 epochs (batch size 16, AdamW optimizer, initial lr 1×10 −4 with cosine annealing). We set α = 0 .5 and latent dimension 

C = 32 . 

> •

BLIP fine-tuning (Stage 2): We adopt the pre-trained BLIP-Base model (ViT-B/16 backbone) as the semantic decoder. BLIP is fine-tuned for 20 epochs on clean 5 0 5 10 15 20 

> SNR (dB)
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> VQA Accuracy (%)
> Clean Video BLIP (95.17%)
> Clean Stacked BLIP (88.13%)
> Full Video JSCC
> H.264 + Video BLIP
> AVG Features + JSCC
> Single Frame + JSCC
> ChronoSC (Ours)

Fig. 2: Comparison of VQA accuracy across different methods. Chrono-Color stacked images using a learning rate of 

2 × 10 −5.

Baselines: To assess the effectiveness of ChronoSC, we compare it against four representative transmission schemes: 1) H.264 + LDPC: A conventional digital scheme where the video ( T = 8 frames) is compressed using H.264 and protected by LDPC codes ( 1/2 rate). 2) DeepJSCC (single frame): Only the middle video frame is transmitted using a transformer-based Deep-JSCC encoder [10], testing whether temporal informa-tion is necessary. 3) Averaged frame: All frames are averaged into a sin-gle image before DeepJSCC transmission, serving as a simple temporal aggregation baseline. 4) Frame-by-Frame DeepJSCC: Each of the T =8 frames is independently encoded using DeepJSCC and processed by Video-BLIP, representing a high-bandwidth oracle-style approach. 

B. Results & Discussion 

Impact of channel noise: As shown in Fig. 2, ChronoSC excels in low-SNR regimes ( −5 to 5 dB). At −5 dB, con-ventional H.264+LDPC suffers a severe cliff effect, dropping to 12 .3% accuracy. In contrast, ChronoSC maintains 66 .2% 

via the graceful degradation of the MAST transceiver. Fur-thermore, ChronoSC outperforms the JSCC-based Averaged Frame baseline by ∼ 15% across all SNRs, proving that Chrono-Color Stacking effectively preserves critical motion semantics (e.g., direction and velocity) lost during naive tem-poral aggregation. 

Bandwidth efficiency and compression : Table I reports per-formance under an extreme noise condition (SNR = 0 dB), highlighting the trade-off between bandwidth and accuracy.  

> •

Bandwidth Efficiency and Compression: The Full Video JSCC oracle achieves the highest accuracy ( 80 .1% )but incurs a high bandwidth cost (BCR ≈ 1.3 × 10 −3). In contrast, ChronoSC attains a comparable accuracy TABLE I: Performance Comparison at Extreme Noise (SNR = 0 dB).                                  

> Method Input Data BCR ( ↓)Accuracy ( ↑)
> @ SNR = 0 dB
> Baselines
> 1. H.264 + LDPC Video ( T= 8 )≈1.6×10 −435 .2%
> 2. Single Frame Image ( T= 1 )1.6×10 −443 .4%
> 3. Averaged Frame Image ( T= 1 )1.6×10 −462 .2%
> 4. Full Video JSCC Video ( T= 8 )1.3×10 −380 .1%
> Proposed Method
> 5. ChronoSC (Ours) Stacked Img 1.6×10 −476 .2%

of 76 .2% (only a 3.9% drop) while achieving 8× less bandwidth (BCR = 1 .6×10 −4). Crucially, while this rep-resents an 8× reduction against the compressed baseline, it corresponds to a massive 192 × bandwidth reduction compared to the transmission of raw uncompressed video (T = 8 frames). This result confirms that Chrono-Color Stacking effectively compresses redundant tem-poral information into a compact spatial representation, making it highly suitable for bandwidth-starved edge environments where transmitting raw or standard-coded video is infeasible. 

C. Computational Complexity Analysis 

To explicitly validate the lightweight design of the proposed ChronoSC framework, we benchmarked the computational complexity of Chrono-Color Stacking against a standard 3D Convolutional Neural Network (C3D-like) backbone com-monly used for spatiotemporal feature extraction. The bench-marking was conducted on a standard hardware setup using a 16-frame video input at a 128 × 128 resolution. TABLE II: Computational Complexity Evaluation          

> Method FLOPs CPU Time (ms) GPU Time (ms)
> 3D CNN (Baseline) 24.9 G 86.4 6.1
> ChronoSC (Ours) 595.5 M 18.3 3.7

As summarized in Table II, the Chrono-Color projection requires only 595 .5 MFLOPs and executes in 18 .3 ms on a CPU. This represents a dramatic 41 .8× reduction in compu-tational complexity compared to the 24.9 GFLOPs demanded by the 3D CNN baseline. Crucially, ChronoSC operates 4.7×

faster on CPU hardware, directly addressing the scalability and energy constraints inherent to edge computing. Fig. 3 provides qualitative insights into why ChronoSC succeeds under severe channel noise.  

> •

Interpreting “Rainbow Trails”: In Question 2 (“What is the shape of the moving metal object?”), the Single Frame baseline fails because a static snapshot cannot disambiguate moving and stationary objects. The Aver-aged Frame baseline introduces ghosting artifacts that blur object boundaries. In contrast, ChronoSC preserves a clear color-gradient trajectory corresponding to the moving sphere, enabling correct inference. (a) Input Video Frames (Sampled at t = 1 , 3, 5, 7)  

> (i) Original ( T x )(ii) Rx @ 0dB

(b) Chrono-Color Encoding (Ours) 

Question (Descriptive) Ground Truth Baselines (@ SNR=0dB) Proposed 

(Label) H.264 +LDPC Single Frame Avg. Frame Full Video (Oracle) ChronoSC 

1. What is the color of the object colliding with the purple cylinder? 

Yellow Grey ✗ Yellow ✓ Yellow ✓ Yellow ✓ Yellow ✓

2. What is the shape of the moving metal object when the video ends? 

Sphere Cube ✗ Cylinder ✗ Cylinder ✗ Sphere ✓ Sphere ✓

3. What is the shape of the object that is station-ary when the sphere enters ?

Cylinder Sphere ✗ Sphere ✗ Cube ✗ Cylinder ✓ Cylinder ✓

Fig. 3: Visualization of semantic transmission under extreme noise (SNR = 0 dB): (a) Sampled input video frames showing a moving sphere and a stationary cylinder. (b) Chrono-Color Stacking encodes the temporal dynamics into a single static image (i). Despite severe channel noise (ii), the resulting color trails remain discernible, enabling the fine-tuned BLIP decoder to correctly infer motion and object attributes (bottom table).  

> •

Adaptation of vision-language models: The correct pre-dictions produced by the fine-tuned BLIP model demon-strate that the VLM successfully learns the mapping from color gradients to motion semantics. This supports our hypothesis that pre-trained VLMs can interpret non-natural ”chrono-images” as a new visual language, effec-tively bridging low-level signal compression and high-level semantic reasoning. A potential concern with Chrono-Color encoding is am-biguity between intrinsic object color and motion-induced hue shifts. However, qualitative results indicate that BLIP reliably distinguishes the two: intrinsic colors remain spatially consistent across object bodies, while motion cues manifest as directional color gradients along object boundaries. Fine-tuning enables the model to learn this distinction effectively. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We proposed ChronoSC, a task-oriented semantic commu-nication framework that compresses temporal video dynamics into a single static image via Chrono-Color Stacking for efficient edge Video Question Answering. Experimental results show that ChronoSC achieves performance comparable to full-video transmission while reducing bandwidth usage by over two orders of magnitude and maintaining strong robustness under noisy channel conditions. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This work was supported by VinUni’s Student Research Grant Program AY24-25 CECS.2425.004. REFERENCES [1] S. H. Wanasekara, V.-D. Nguyen, K.-S. Wong, M.-D. Nguyen, S. Chatzinotas, and O. A. Dobre, “SC-GIR: Goal-oriented semantic com-munication via invariant representation learning for image transmission,” 

IEEE Trans. Mobi. Comput. , pp. 1–15, 2025. [2] T. Wiegand, G. J. Sullivan, G. Bjontegaard, and A. Luthra, “Overview of the H.264/AVC video coding standard,” IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. Video Tech. , vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 560–576, 2003. [3] Z. Qin, X. Tao, J. Lu, W. Tong, and G. Y. Li, “Semantic communications: Principles and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01389 , 2021. [4] G. Li, S. Wang, Z. Gao, Q. Guo, and G. Y. Li, “VideoQA-SC: Adaptive semantic communication for video question answering,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , 2025, (To appear). [5] Z. Wu, N. Dvornik, K. Greff, T. Kipf, and A. Garg, “Slotformer: Unsupervised visual dynamics simulation with object-centric models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05861 , 2022. [6] T. M. Le, V. Le, S. Venkatesh, and T. Tran, “Hierarchical conditional relation networks for video question answering,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comp. Visi. Patt. Recog. (CVPR) , 2020, pp. 9969–9978. [7] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “BLIP: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation,” in Proc. Inter. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML) , 2022. [8] K. Yi, C. Gan, Y. Li, P. Kohli, J. Wu, A. Torralba, and J. B. Tenenbaum, “CLEVRER: Collision events for video representation and reasoning,” in Proc. Inter. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML) , 2020. [9] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. G¨ und¨ uz, “Deep joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Networ. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, 2019. [10] K. Yang, S. Wang, J. Dai, X. Qin, K. Niu, and P. Zhang, “SwinJSCC: Taming Swin transformer for deep joint source-channel coding,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Networ. , 2024. [11] H. Xie, Z. Qin, and G. Y. Li, “Task-oriented multi-user semantic communications for VQA task,” IEEE Wire.s Commun. Lett. , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 553–557, 2021. [12] E. Yosef, S. Elmalem, and R. Giryes, “Video reconstruction from a single motion blurred image using learned dynamic phase coding,” Scientific Reports , vol. 13, p. 13625, 2023. [13] Y. Zhong et al. , “VDM-MD: Video diffusion model for motion deblur-ring,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12604 , 2025.