Title: MSCGC-KAN: Multi-scale Causal Graph Convolution and Kolmogorov-Arnold Feature Mapping for EEG Emotion Recognition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26624v2

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:37:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# MSCGC-KAN: Multi-scale Causal Graph Convolution and Kolmogorov–Arnold Feature Mapping for EEG Emotion Recognition 

Haoliang Gong a, Qingshan She a,b, ∗, Jiale Xu a, Yunyuan Gao a,b , Xugang Xi a,b 

> aSchool of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
> bZhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Computer Collaborative Intelligence Technology and Applications

Abstract 

Electroencephalogram (EEG)-based emotion recognition is an important affective computing task, and recent EEG foundation models provide useful generic repre-sentations for downstream adaptation. However, under the fine-tuning setting, three limitations remain prominent: insufficient modeling of multi-scale emotional dynam-ics, inadequate exploitation of inter-channel functional connectivity, and the limited expressive power of simple linear classification heads. To address these issues, this paper proposes a new EEG emotion recognition method, termed MSCGC-KAN, which introduces a structured task head composed of multi-scale causal graph convolution and Kolmogorov–Arnold feature mapping. Built on a pre-trained CBraMod backbone, MSCGC-KAN enhances downstream adaptation by jointly strengthening multi-scale temporal modeling, learnable inter-channel connectivity modeling, and nonlinear dis-criminative mapping within a compact task-specific head. This design preserves the representation advantage of the foundation model while making the classifier more sensitive to emotion-related spatiotemporal patterns. Extensive experiments are con-ducted on the public FACED and SEED-VII datasets. The proposed method achieves a balanced accuracy of 60.66%, a Cohen’s Kappa of 0.5525, and a weighted F1-score   

> ∗Corresponding author: Qingshan She
> Email address: qsshe@hdu.edu.cn (Qingshan She)
> arXiv:2605.26624v2 [cs.CV] 27 May 2026

of 60.40% on FACED, and obtains 33.27%, 0.2223, and 33.64%, respectively, on SEED-VII. Compared with the CBraMod+Linear baseline, the balanced accuracy is improved by 5.91 and 2.03 percentage points on the two datasets, respectively. These results indicate that structured task-head design is an effective way to improve EEG emotion recognition when fine-tuning pre-trained EEG models. 

Keywords: EEG emotion recognition, causal convolution, graph convolutional network, Kolmogorov–Arnold network, foundation model fine-tuning 

1. Introduction 

Emotion recognition is a fundamental problem in affective computing and human– computer interaction. Its goal is to enable intelligent systems to perceive human affective states and provide appropriate feedback, which is important for natural inter-action, healthcare assistance, mental-state monitoring, and brain–computer interface applications [1]. Existing emotion recognition studies have explored multiple external behavioral modalities, including facial and micro-expression cues [2], speech signals [3], and textual semantic information [4]. These modalities are convenient and infor-mative, but they can be affected by voluntary masking, environmental conditions, and individual expression habits. Compared with external behavioral signals, physiological signals provide a more direct reflection of internal affective responses. Among them, electroencephalogram (EEG) has attracted particular attention because it records neural activity with high tem-poral resolution, noninvasive acquisition, and a clear physiological basis. EEG-based emotion recognition is therefore considered a promising route for objective affective computing and practical brain–computer interaction. At the same time, EEG signals are weak, non-stationary, noisy, and strongly affected by inter-subject differences, which makes it difficult to extract stable and discriminative emotional representations. Cross-subject EEG emotion recognition studies have shown the influence of individual differences on affective feature transfer [5]. Temporally stable neural-pattern analysis 2further indicates that EEG contains useful affective information, but robust modeling of such information remains challenging [6]. To address these difficulties, researchers have developed a wide range of EEG feature extraction and classification methods. Samal et al. systematically reviewed machine-learning and deep-learning approaches for EEG-BCI emotion recognition and highlighted cross-subject generalization, feature robustness, and model interpretability as key open problems [7]. Early studies often relied on handcrafted features such as differential entropy, power spectral density, and Hjorth parameters. Although these features provide some interpretability, they depend strongly on expert knowledge and are often insufficient to characterize the dynamic evolution of neural activity. With the rise of deep learning, automatic representation learning has become mainstream. Ding et al. proposed MASA-TCN, which combines multi-anchor temporal modeling with space-aware convolution for continuous and discrete EEG emotion recognition, offering an effective direction for multi-scale temporal feature extraction [8]. Li et al. studied EEG emotion recognition based on 3-D feature representation and dilated fully convolutional networks, showing that convolutional structures remain competitive in end-to-end EEG emotion feature learning [9]. Cheng et al. further combined multi-scale dynamic convolution, gated Transformer, and temporal convolution to capture local dynamics and global dependencies simultaneously, reflecting the recent trend toward multi-scale temporal fusion [10]. However, these methods still mainly em-phasize temporal-pattern aggregation, while the spatial organization of EEG channels, frequency-related variations, and the interpretability of downstream decision features are often modeled only implicitly or separately. This limitation suggests that tempo-ral fusion alone is insufficient for robust EEG emotion recognition and motivates a broader representation strategy that jointly considers temporal, spectral, spatial, and attention-based information. To complement temporal modeling, spatial, spectral, and attention mechanisms have also been widely used to improve EEG emotion recognition. Jia et al. con-3structed a spatial-frequency-temporal attention 3D dense network to jointly encode multi-dimensional EEG information and alleviate insufficient single-view representa-tion [11]. Tao et al. combined channel attention with self-attention so that the model could adaptively emphasize important electrode channels and temporal segments [12]. Liu et al. proposed ERTNet and emphasized the role of Transformer structures in interpretable EEG emotion recognition, suggesting that attention weights and repre-sentation visualization can provide supplementary explanations for model decisions [13]. These studies show that EEG emotion patterns are not confined to local tempo-ral fluctuations, but depend on coordinated variations across temporal, spectral, and spatial dimensions. Because EEG channels naturally correspond to different brain regions, graph neu-ral networks have become important tools for modeling inter-regional relationships. Zhang et al. proposed SparseDGCNN, which introduces a sparsity constraint into dy-namic graph convolution to model localized functional relations among multichannel EEG signals [14]. Zhong et al. used regularized graph neural networks to con-strain channel-relation learning and improve the stability of graph-structure modeling [15]. Song et al. introduced dynamic GCNs whose adjacency relationships adapt to sample features, thereby enhancing brain-region dependency modeling [16]. Chen et al. combined graph convolution with channel and frequency-band dual attention to further interpret model attention patterns at both brain-region and frequency-band levels [17]. Li et al. proposed a temporal-frequency graph convolutional network with cross-subject alignment to handle sparse time-frequency-spatial distributions and individual differences [18]. Shen et al. further integrated dynamic sparse directed graph convolution with attention mechanisms to improve the directionality and flexi-bility of cross-region connectivity modeling [19]. These studies indicate that explicit functional-connectivity modeling is an important path toward improved EEG emo-tion recognition, but how to integrate this spatial relation modeling with downstream classifier design in the foundation-model fine-tuning scenario remains underexplored. 4Meanwhile, self-supervised learning has promoted the development of EEG foun-dation models. Wang et al. proposed CBraMod, which learns generic representations from large-scale EEG data through criss-cross brain-region modeling and shows strong transfer ability across EEG decoding tasks [20]. Yang et al. proposed BIOT, applying a biosignal Transformer to cross-dataset learning and showing that unified pre-training can improve generalization across physiological tasks [21]. Jiang et al. constructed a brain foundation model for BCI and further verified the potential of large-scale EEG representation learning in downstream tasks [22]. Wang et al. proposed a graph-enhanced EEG foundation model and introduced channel-relation modeling into the pre-training framework, showing that foundation models also need to consider structural dependencies among EEG channels [23]. These studies indicate that EEG modeling is shifting from task-specific training from scratch to transfer learning based on pre-trained representations. However, most existing work focuses on the backbone itself, while the structure of the downstream classification head remains insufficiently studied. In practice, a simple average-pooling and linear-projection head may be un-able to fully exploit the multi-scale temporal information, spatial connectivity patterns, and complex nonlinear decision boundaries contained in pre-trained features. More-over, when the downstream head is reduced to a black-box linear projection, it provides limited evidence about which temporal, spatial, or nonlinear feature components con-tribute to emotion discrimination. Therefore, two challenges remain: how to design a compact yet expressive task head that can better adapt pre-trained EEG representa-tions to emotion recognition, and how to construct an interpretable nonlinear feature mapping module that strengthens discrimination while providing analyzable feature responses. To address these challenges, this paper focuses on downstream classification-head design during EEG foundation-model fine-tuning and proposes MSCGC-KAN, an EEG emotion recognition method centered on a structured task head composed of multi-scale causal graph convolution and Kolmogorov–Arnold feature mapping. 5Rather than redesigning the pre-trained backbone, the proposed method constructs a structured enhancement module after the backbone output. It first uses multi-scale causal residual graph convolution to capture emotion dynamics over different temporal ranges and explicitly model functional connectivity among EEG channels through learnable graph convolution. It then replaces a single linear projection with a lightweight nonlinear feature mapping layer to enhance the head’s ability to represent complex affective decision boundaries. Through this design, the paper aims to preserve the generic representation advantage of the foundation model while further releasing its discriminative potential for downstream emotion recognition. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows. 1. A structured task-head framework is proposed for EEG foundation model fine-tuning. Without heavily modifying the backbone, the framework unifies multi-scale temporal modeling, spatial connectivity modeling, and nonlinear discrim-inative enhancement within a single downstream classification head. 2. A multi-scale causal residual graph convolution module is designed to capture temporal dynamics at different scales while preserving causal constraints and to model adaptive inter-channel functional connectivity through a learnable graph structure. 3. A lightweight KAN-inspired feature mapping layer is constructed by replac-ing a single linear projection with analytic basis expansion, thereby improving nonlinear discrimination of high-dimensional EEG features under a manageable parameter cost. 4. Comprehensive experiments on the public FACED and SEED-VII datasets, to-gether with ablation studies and interpretability analyses, verify both the effec-tiveness and the explanatory value of the proposed method. The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II presents the proposed MSCGC-KAN framework, including the CBraMod backbone, the multi-scale causal 6Figure 1: Overall architecture of the proposed MSCGC-KAN model. CBraMod first extracts generic EEG representations, MCRBlock-GCN then performs multi-scale causal temporal modeling and learnable graph-based spatial modeling, and KANLinear finally maps the enhanced features to an expressive nonlinear discriminative space for emotion classification. 

residual graph convolution module, and the KAN-based nonlinear feature mapping layer. Section III describes the experimental settings and reports the quantitative results, ablation studies, and visualization analyses on FACED and SEED-VII. Section IV discusses the mechanism, interpretability, and limitations of the proposed method. Section V concludes this article. 

2. Methods 

2.1. Overall Framework 

This article proposes a structured task-head framework for EEG emotion recog-nition, termed MSCGC-KAN, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The framework is designed to adapt pre-trained EEG representations to emotion recognition by addressing three key requirements: multi-scale temporal modeling, adaptive inter-channel connectiv-ity modeling, and interpretable nonlinear feature mapping. Instead of modifying the pre-trained backbone extensively, MSCGC-KAN places a compact enhancement head after CBraMod so that the generic representation ability of the foundation model can be preserved while task-specific discriminative information is further extracted. The proposed framework consists of three main components: the pre-trained 7Table 1: Description of Frequently Used Notations 

Notation Description 

𝐵 Batch size. 

𝐶 Number of EEG channels. 

𝑆 Number of temporal windows. 

𝐷 Feature dimension of each temporal window. 

X Input EEG sample tensor. 

F Generic EEG representation produced by CBraMod. 

H Enhanced representation produced by MCRBlock-GCN. 

K Set of temporal convolution kernel sizes. 

o𝑘 Output of the temporal branch with kernel size 𝑘 .

A Learnable adjacency matrix for channel connectivity. 

ˆA Symmetrically normalized adjacency matrix. 

ˆy Predicted emotion-label distribution. CBraMod backbone, the multi-scale causal residual graph convolution module, and the KAN-based classification head. CBraMod first serves as a generic EEG encoder and produces high-dimensional features from the input temporal windows. These features are then reorganized into a tensor form suitable for structured downstream model-ing. MCRBlock-GCN subsequently performs multi-scale causal temporal modeling and learnable graph-based spatial modeling, enabling the task head to capture both emotion-related temporal dynamics and adaptive inter-channel functional connectivity. Finally, KANLinear expands the enhanced representation with analytic basis functions before classification, thereby improving nonlinear discrimination under a controlled parameter budget. Some frequently used notations are summarized in Table 1 to facilitate reading. This design follows the principle that the foundation model provides robust generic representations, while the task head performs structured task-specific enhancement. In this way, intrusive changes to the pre-trained backbone are avoided, and the effect of downstream adaptation can be studied more clearly. For clarity, the detailed com-putational flow is described as follows. Given an input EEG sample X ∈ R𝐵 ×𝐶 ×𝑆 ×𝐷 ,where 𝐵 is the batch size, 𝐶 is the number of channels, 𝑆 is the number of temporal 8windows, and 𝐷 is the feature dimension of each temporal window, CBraMod first obtains a generic EEG representation. The backbone output is then reshaped and forwarded to MCRBlock-GCN for joint enhancement along the temporal and channel dimensions. Finally, the resulting features are flattened and mapped by the KAN layer followed by a linear classifier. The processing pipeline can be written as 

F = CBraMod (X), (1) 

H = MCRBlock -GCN (Reshape (F)) , (2) 

ˆy = Classifier (KANLinear (Flatten (H))) . (3) 

2.2. CBraMod Backbone for Feature Encoding 

CBraMod is adopted as the feature-encoding backbone in this work [20]. It is an EEG foundation model pre-trained in a self-supervised manner on large-scale clinical EEG data. Its core advantage lies in separately modeling temporal and spatial de-pendencies and further improving robustness across different EEG formats through a criss-cross attention mechanism. Compared with emotion recognition models trained from scratch, CBraMod provides a more stable initialization and helps alleviate com-mon difficulties in EEG learning, including limited sample size, large inter-subject variation, and unstable optimization. Within the proposed framework, CBraMod transforms raw EEG samples into high-dimensional spatiotemporal features. Since the backbone already possesses strong generic representation ability after pre-training, this work does not redesign the back-bone itself. Instead, the focus is placed on the downstream head, which is expected to further unlock the discriminative potential of the pre-trained representation in the emotion recognition setting. 92.3. Multi-scale Causal Residual Graph Convolution Module 

Emotion-related EEG patterns typically contain both short-term local fluctuations and long-range dynamic trends. A single receptive field is therefore insufficient to represent the full temporal hierarchy. To address this issue, a multi-scale causal residual graph convolution module, termed MCRBlock-GCN, is designed to perform joint spatiotemporal modeling through the combination of multi-scale causal convolution, graph convolution, and residual fusion. 

2.3.1. Causal temporal modeling 

Several one-dimensional causal convolution branches with different kernel sizes are first applied in parallel along the temporal dimension. For a branch with kernel size 

𝑘 , the output depends only on the current and previous time steps, which preserves temporal order and keeps the task head compatible with potential online emotion-recognition scenarios [24]. Each branch follows the sequence of left-only causal padding, Conv1D, BatchNorm1D, ELU, and Dropout. Let x denote the input sequence of MCRBlock-GCN, which is obtained by reshaping the CBraMod feature. Thus, x is the task-head input representation rather than the raw EEG sample X. The 𝑘 -th branch can be written as 

o𝑘 = CausalConv 𝑘 (x), 𝑘 ∈ K , (4) where K is the set of kernel sizes. The outputs of all branches are kept aligned in the channel dimension and fused by summation: 

o =∑︁  

> 𝑘 ∈ K

o𝑘 . (5) Compared with feature concatenation, branch summation enables cross-scale fusion without markedly increasing the parameter count. This parallel multi-scale branch design is also consistent with the classic Inception-style feature extraction idea [25]. 10 2.3.2. Graph-based spatial dependency modeling 

After temporal enhancement, a learnable graph convolution layer is introduced along the channel dimension to explicitly model functional connectivity among EEG channels. Each EEG channel is treated as a graph node, and a learnable adjacency matrix A ∈ R𝐶 ×𝐶 is used to describe the interaction structure. To stabilize graph construction, an ELU-based transformation is applied to the adjacency parameters, self-loops are added, and the matrix is symmetrically normalized: 

˜A = ELU (A) + I, (6) 

ˆA = D− 12 ˜AD − 12 , (7) where D is the degree matrix. Graph-based feature propagation is then performed as 

Z = ˆAo . (8) This operation propagates information across channels and enables the model to capture coordinated patterns among different brain regions on top of the enhanced temporal representation. Because the adjacency matrix is learned entirely from data, it can be visualized after training as an adaptive functional connectivity graph. 

2.3.3. Residual enhancement and post-normalization 

To improve training stability and preserve the original semantic information, a residual connection is applied at the end of the module. The graph-enhanced feature is added to the input feature and then post-processed by batch normalization, ELU, and Dropout: 

H = Dropout (ELU (BN (Z + x))) . (9) This design helps alleviate gradient degradation while reducing the risk of losing useful discriminative information through excessive graph smoothing. Overall, MCRBlock-11 GCN follows a “temporal-first, spatial-second” pathway and equips the task head with more structured joint spatiotemporal representations. 

2.4. KAN-based Nonlinear Feature Mapping 

In many EEG classifiers, high-dimensional features are projected directly to the label space by a single linear layer. While computationally efficient, such a design is limited in expressiveness and often fails to capture complex nonlinear class boundaries. To address this weakness, a KAN-inspired feature mapping layer is introduced in the proposed framework. 

2.4.1. Analytic basis expansion 

Let h be the input feature. The KAN layer first produces a hidden representation through linear projection and layer normalization. After SiLU activation, analytic basis expansion is constructed as 

𝜙 (h) = [h, h2, sin (h), tanh (h)] . (10) The expanded feature is then mapped to the output space by a linear projection. The theoretical motivation of KAN can be traced to the Kolmogorov–Arnold representa-tion theorem [26]. Unlike the original KAN formulation, which relies on learnable spline bases [27], the current implementation uses fixed analytic basis functions. This lightweight design has two advantages: low computational overhead and improved training stability. It also matches the oscillatory, energy-related, and saturation-like characteristics often observed in EEG feature distributions. 

2.4.2. Parameter efficiency and extensibility 

In the implementation used here, the flattened feature is first projected to a 512-dimensional hidden space, after which the expanded basis representation is mapped to the classifier output. When richer nonlinear modeling is needed, the design can 12 Algorithm 1 Implementation steps of the proposed MSCGC-KAN 

Require: Training samples {X𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 }, pre-trained CBraMod weights, epochs 𝐸 

Ensure: Best model parameters and test predictions  

> 1:

Initialize CBraMod and attach MCRBlock-GCN, KANLinear, and a linear classi-fier.  

> 2:

Use differential learning rates for the backbone and the task head.  

> 3:

for epoch = 1 to 𝐸 do  

> 4:

Extract backbone features F = CBraMod (X) for each mini-batch.  

> 5:

Obtain H by multi-scale causal convolution, graph convolution, and residual fusion.  

> 6:

Map H with KANLinear and predict labels using the final classifier.  

> 7:

Optimize cross-entropy loss with gradient clipping and cosine annealing.  

> 8:

Save the checkpoint if the validation Kappa is improved.  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Load the best checkpoint and report test-set metrics. be further extended with higher-order harmonic terms such as sin (𝑛ℎ ) and cos (𝑛ℎ ).Therefore, the module simultaneously provides expressive nonlinear modeling and good structural extensibility. 

3. Experiments and Results 

3.1. Datasets and Experimental Settings 

The proposed method is evaluated on two public EEG emotion recognition datasets, FACED and SEED-VII. FACED is a finer-grained affective computing EEG dataset collected from 123 subjects using 32 electrodes arranged according to the interna-tional 10–20 system [28]. In the original FACED experiment, each subject watched 28 emotion-elicitation video clips covering nine emotional categories, including four posi-tive emotions, four negative emotions, and neutral emotion. This balanced fine-grained design makes FACED suitable for evaluating multi-class EEG emotion recognition and cross-subject generalization. SEED-VII is a multimodal emotion dataset designed for six basic emotions and neutral emotion [29]. It contains EEG and eye-movement recordings from 20 subjects, with four sessions per subject and 20 emotion-eliciting videos per session. In this paper, only the EEG modality of SEED-VII is used. Com-13 pared with FACED, SEED-VII uses a higher-density 62-channel EEG configuration and seven emotional categories, making it suitable for evaluating spatial modeling under a different channel scale and label structure. The preprocessing follows the acquisition and cleaning protocols reported with the two datasets. For FACED, EEG signals were originally recorded at 250 or 1000 Hz and were unified to 250 Hz after acquisition. The official preprocessing selects the last 30 s of each video trial, applies a 0.05–47 Hz band-pass filter, interpolates bad electrodes, removes ocular artifacts by independent component analysis using FP1/FP2 as proxy electro-oculogram channels, and re-references the cleaned signals to the common average reference. Therefore, each preprocessed FACED trial contains 

30 × 250 = 7500 temporal samples. For compatibility with the CBraMod temporal-window input and with the 200 Hz temporal resolution used for SEED-VII, each 30-s FACED trial is further resampled to 200 Hz, resulting in 30 ×200 = 6000 samples. Each trial is then divided into 30 non-overlapping temporal windows, with 200 samples in each window. To increase the number of training instances while preserving temporal order, the 30-window sequence is further separated into three consecutive 10-window samples, leading to the final input shape (32 , 10 , 200 ).For SEED-VII, EEG signals were acquired at 1000 Hz using 62 active AgCl electrodes arranged according to the international 10–20 system. The preprocessing described with the dataset first inspects the EEG signals and interpolates bad channels, then applies a 0.1–70 Hz band-pass filter and a 50 Hz notch filter to suppress slow drift, high-frequency noise, and power-line interference. The raw signals are subsequently downsampled to 200 Hz. In this work, the preprocessed EEG sequences are segmented into non-overlapping samples consisting of 10 consecutive temporal windows, with 200 samples in each window. Thus, each SEED-VII input sample covers 2000 temporal samples and has the shape (62 , 10 , 200 ).14 3.2. Data Split Protocol 

Different evaluation protocols are adopted for the two datasets according to their data organization and experimental purpose. FACED follows a subject-wise protocol, where subjects 1–80 are used for training, subjects 81–100 for validation, and subjects 101–123 for testing. For SEED-VII, all 20 subjects and all four sessions of each subject are used. The split is performed separately within each subject-session group: the 20 trials in one session are divided in order into 10 training trials, 5 validation trials, and 5 testing trials. After this within-session partitioning, the training, validation, and testing samples from all subjects and sessions are pooled to form the final three subsets. This protocol preserves all available subjects and sessions while keeping the trial partitions within each session clearly separated. 

3.3. Evaluation Metrics and Model Selection 

Three metrics are adopted to comprehensively evaluate model performance: bal-anced accuracy, Cohen’s Kappa, and weighted F1-score. Let 𝑀 denote the number of emotion classes, 𝑁 the total number of test samples, and 𝑛 𝑖 𝑗 the number of sam-ples whose ground-truth label is class 𝑖 and predicted label is class 𝑗 . For class 𝑐 ,true positives, false positives, and false negatives are denoted as TP 𝑐 , FP 𝑐 , and FN 𝑐 ,respectively. Balanced accuracy is defined as the average recall over all classes: 

BA = 1

𝑀 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑐 =1

TP 𝑐 

TP 𝑐 + FN 𝑐 

. (11) Compared with conventional accuracy, balanced accuracy gives equal importance to each class and is therefore more suitable when class distributions or class-wise recognition difficulties are uneven. In all reported results, accuracy refers to balanced accuracy. 15 Cohen’s Kappa measures the agreement between model predictions and ground-truth labels after discounting chance agreement: 

𝜅 = 𝑝 𝑜 − 𝑝 𝑒 

1 − 𝑝 𝑒 

, (12) where 

𝑝 𝑜 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑛 𝑖𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑒 = 1

𝑁 2

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑛 𝑖 · 𝑛 ·𝑖 . (13) Here, 𝑝 𝑜 is the observed agreement, 𝑝 𝑒 is the expected agreement by chance, 𝑛 𝑖 · is the number of samples belonging to class 𝑖 , and 𝑛 ·𝑖 is the number of samples predicted as class 𝑖 . A higher Kappa value indicates better agreement beyond random guessing, making it informative for multi-class emotion recognition. The weighted F1-score is computed as 

WF1 =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑐 =1

𝑛 𝑐 ·

𝑁 F1 𝑐 , (14) with 

F1 𝑐 = 2𝑃 𝑐 𝑅 𝑐 

𝑃 𝑐 + 𝑅 𝑐 

,𝑃 𝑐 = TP 𝑐 

TP 𝑐 + FP 𝑐 

,𝑅 𝑐 = TP 𝑐 

TP 𝑐 + FN 𝑐 

,

(15) where 𝑛 𝑐 · is the number of samples belonging to class 𝑐 , and 𝑃 𝑐 and 𝑅 𝑐 are the precision and recall of class 𝑐 , respectively. This metric balances precision and recall while weighting each class according to its support. Model selection is based on the Kappa score of the validation set instead of the test set. This strategy provides a more reliable criterion for checkpoint selection in the multi-class setting and reduces the influence of accidental fluctuations on the final conclusions. 16 Table 2: Training and Reproducibility Settings 

Item Setting GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 Framework PyTorch 2.7.0 Epochs 30 Batch size 64 Optimizer AdamW [30] Weight decay 5 × 10 −2

Backbone learning rate 1 × 10 −4

Task-head learning rate 5 × 10 −4

Gradient clipping Maximum norm of 1.0 Learning-rate scheduler Cosine annealing Minimum learning rate 1 × 10 −6

Dropout 0.1 MCRBlock-GCN kernels K = {3, 5}

3.4. Training Implementation Details 

To make the experiments reproducible, the main implementation settings used for FACED and SEED-VII are summarized in Table 2. All experiments were conducted on an Ubuntu server equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. The proposed model was implemented using PyTorch 2.7.0. The CBraMod backbone is initialized with pre-trained weights and is not frozen during fine-tuning. A differential learning-rate strategy is used for the pre-trained backbone and the newly introduced classification head. Specifically, the backbone is optimized with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4, whereas MCRBlock-GCN and the KAN mapping layer are optimized with a learning rate of 5 × 10 −4, giving a backbone-to-head learning-rate ratio of 1:5 . This setting is adopted because the pre-trained backbone already contains strong generic EEG representations and should be updated conservatively, while the randomly initialized task head requires faster adaptation to emotion-specific discriminative patterns. Cross-entropy loss is adopted for both datasets. Gradient clipping is applied after back-propagation to stabilize optimization, and the cosine annealing scheduler is updated at each training iteration to gradually reduce the learning rate during fine-17 tuning. Together with weight decay and dropout, these strategies help preserve the useful knowledge in the pre-trained backbone while allowing the task head to acquire task-specific discrimination. The checkpoint with the best validation-set Kappa score is selected and then evaluated on the test set. 

3.5. Results on the FACED Dataset 

To more comprehensively evaluate the proposed method on the fine-grained FACED emotion recognition task, several representative comparison methods are included. EEGNet [31] is a lightweight convolutional network for brain–computer interface tasks. EEGConformer [32] combines local convolutional feature extraction with Transformer-based global modeling. SPaRCNet [33], CNN-Transformer [34], FFCL [35], and ST-Transformer [36] respectively represent residual convolutional, convolution-Transformer hybrid, frequency-aware contrastive learning, and spatiotemporal Transformer direc-tions. ContraWR [37], BIOT [21], and LaBraM-Base [22] reflect self-supervised or foundation-model ideas in EEG decoding. The results of these representative baselines are cited from the previously reported FACED evaluation in the CBraMod paper [20]. Although the same dataset and evaluation metrics are used, minor differences in pre-processing, implementation details, data splits, or model selection criteria may exist. Therefore, the comparison in Table 3 should be interpreted as a reference-based hor-izontal comparison rather than a strictly controlled reimplementation of all baselines under an identical protocol. Table 3 first presents the reference comparison between the proposed method and representative baselines on FACED. Traditional lightweight convolution-based modeling shows limited effectiveness in this 9-class fine-grained emotion recognition task, indicating that shallow temporal convolution alone is insufficient for modeling complex affective EEG features. This observation is also consistent with recent reviews emphasizing the need to jointly handle temporal dynamics, spatial distributions, and cross-subject variations in EEG emotion recognition [7]. EEGConformer improves 18 Table 3: Performance comparison of different methods on the FACED dataset (mean ±std). 

Method Balanced Accuracy Kappa Weighted F1 EEGNet 0.4090 ±0.0122 0.3342 ±0.0251 0.4124 ±0.0141 EEGConformer 0.4559 ±0.0125 0.3858 ±0.0186 0.4514 ±0.0107 SPaRCNet 0.4673 ±0.0155 0.3978 ±0.0289 0.4729 ±0.0133 ContraWR 0.4887 ±0.0078 0.4231 ±0.0151 0.4884 ±0.0074 CNN-Transformer 0.4697 ±0.0132 0.4017 ±0.0168 0.4720 ±0.0125 FFCL 0.4673 ±0.0158 0.3987 ±0.0383 0.4699 ±0.0145 ST-Transformer 0.4810 ±0.0079 0.4137 ±0.0133 0.4795 ±0.0096 BIOT 0.5118 ±0.0118 0.4476 ±0.0254 0.5136 ±0.0112 LaBraM-Base 0.5273 ±0.0107 0.4698 ±0.0188 0.5288 ±0.0102 CBraMod+Linear 0.5475 ±0.0060 0.4873 ±0.0123 0.5463 ±0.0167 

MSCGC-KAN (ours) 0.6066 ±0.0076 0.5525 ±0.0141 0.6040 ±0.0262 

performance by introducing Transformer-style global modeling, but it remains clearly lower than foundation-model fine-tuning methods. BIOT and LaBraM-Base benefit from large-scale pre-training, yet their downstream heads still have difficulty fully exploiting emotion-related spatiotemporal structures. In this reference comparison, CBraMod+Linear already shows strong transfer ability, and MSCGC-KAN further obtains the highest reported values on top of this baseline. This trend suggests that a structured downstream head can effectively unlock the discriminative potential of foundation-model representations. 

3.6. Results on the SEED-VII Dataset 

To further examine the adaptability of the proposed method in a high-channel multi-class emotion recognition scenario, additional reference results reported in the DeeperBrain paper are included for SEED-VII [38]. EEGNet [31] and EEGConformer [32] serve as lightweight convolutional and convolution-Transformer baselines, respec-tively. CBraMod [20] reflects the transfer performance of a criss-cross brain-region modeling foundation model on SEED-VII, while CSBrain [39] and REVE [40] are recent foundation-model or generic EEG representation approaches for seven-class 19 Table 4: Performance comparison of different methods on the SEED-VII dataset (mean ±std). 

Method Balanced Accuracy Kappa Weighted F1 EEGNet 0.2528 ±0.0033 0.1285 ±0.0044 0.2536 ±0.0036 EEGConformer 0.2875 ±0.0028 0.1747 ±0.0030 0.2802 ±0.0028 CBraMod+Linear 0.3124 ±0.0041 0.2007 ±0.0052 0.3190 ±0.0056 CSBrain 0.3244 ±0.0038 0.2145 ±0.0049 0.3274 ±0.0047 REVE 0.3264 ±0.0034 0.2172 ±0.0037 0.3302 ±0.0031 

MSCGC-KAN (ours) 0.3327 ±0.0056 0.2223 ±0.0088 0.3364 ±0.0075 

emotion recognition. These results are cited from previously reported evaluations. Although the same dataset and metrics are used, minor differences in preprocessing, implementation details, data splits, or model selection criteria may exist; thus, Table 4 is intended as a reference comparison rather than a strictly fair comparison based on complete reimplementation under one unified protocol. Table 4 reports the comparison results on SEED-VII. A trend similar to FACED can be observed. Although EEGNet and EEGConformer respectively represent classic lightweight convolutional and convolution-Transformer hybrid models, they still show clear performance limitations on this 7-class high-channel task. Benefiting from the pre-trained backbone, CBraMod+Linear provides a stronger starting point. CSBrain and REVE also approach this level, but remain below the proposed method. Overall, the results suggest that MSCGC-KAN continues to achieve stable improvements under the high-density 62-channel setting, indicating that the designed task head is not restricted to the 32-channel setting and can also transfer well to higher-density EEG configurations. Compared with FACED, SEED-VII has a higher channel count and a more complex data distribution, making the task more difficult overall. Even so, the proposed model shows competitive performance in the reference comparison, which indicates that MSCGC-KAN is not restricted to the 32-channel setting and can also transfer well to higher-density EEG configurations. 20 Table 5: Ablation results on the FACED dataset (mean ±std).                

> Configuration Balanced Accuracy Kappa Weighted F1 Baseline (CBraMod+Linear) 0.5475 ±0.0060 0.4873 ±0.0123 0.5463 ±0.0167 +KAN 0.5702 ±0.0071 0.5106 ±0.0128 0.5669 ±0.0194 +MCRBlock-GCN 0.5553 ±0.0065 0.4944 ±0.0131 0.5513 ±0.0176
> MSCGC-KAN (full model) 0.6066 ±0.0076 0.5525 ±0.0141 0.6040 ±0.0262

3.7. Ablation Experiments 

To further decompose the contributions of different components, ablation exper-iments are conducted on both FACED and SEED-VII. Table 5 reports the FACED results. Using CBraMod with only a linear head already yields competitive perfor-mance, which confirms that the foundation model provides high-quality generic rep-resentations for emotion recognition. Adding the KAN mapping layer produces stable improvements across all three metrics, indicating that additional nonlinear discrimina-tion remains beneficial even when the backbone is strong. Adding MCRBlock-GCN also leads to positive gains, showing that explicit joint spatiotemporal modeling can compensate for the inability of a plain linear head to exploit temporal dynamics and inter-channel relations. The full model achieves the best performance on all three metrics, with 60.66% balanced accuracy, a Kappa of 0.5525, and 60.40% weighted F1-score. Table 6 reports the ablation results on SEED-VII. Although the task is more challenging because of the seven-class label space and the 62-channel configuration, the full MSCGC-KAN model still attains the best performance on all three evaluation metrics. The gain trend is largely consistent with that on FACED, which further indicates that the proposed method does not merely exploit a dataset-specific bias. In particular, under the high-density channel setting, the graph convolution module can adaptively learn a larger channel relation structure, demonstrating good capability in modeling spatial connectivity patterns. The ablation results further show that the independent contribution of the KAN 21 Table 6: Ablation results on the SEED-VII dataset (mean ±std).                

> Configuration Balanced Accuracy Kappa Weighted F1 Baseline (CBraMod+Linear) 0.3124 ±0.0041 0.2007 ±0.0052 0.3190 ±0.0056 +KAN 0.3205 ±0.0048 0.2094 ±0.0058 0.3226 ±0.0061 +MCRBlock-GCN 0.3143 ±0.0045 0.1996 ±0.0054 0.3147 ±0.0059
> MSCGC-KAN (full model) 0.3327 ±0.0056 0.2223 ±0.0088 0.3364 ±0.0075

layer is relatively pronounced, implying that nonlinear expressive power at the classi-fication stage remains a key factor even when the backbone representation is already strong. In contrast, the standalone gain from MCRBlock-GCN is more moderate, but the overall improvement becomes substantially larger when MCRBlock-GCN is combined with KAN. This pattern suggests a stable complementarity between struc-tured spatiotemporal enhancement and analytic nonlinear mapping. In other words, the advantage of MSCGC-KAN does not arise from a naive stacking of modules, but from the synergy between spatiotemporal reorganization and nonlinear discriminative refinement. Taken together, the results on the two datasets suggest that MSCGC-KAN maintains a stable advantage across different class settings and channel scales. 

3.8. Visualization 3.8.1. Confusion Matrix Analysis 

Figs. 2 and 3 present the confusion matrices on the two datasets. Overall, both matrices show a pronounced diagonal-dominant structure, which indicates that the model learns relatively stable decision boundaries for most emotion classes. On FACED, the highest recalls appear for Fear and Joy, both reaching 70.0%, whereas Sadness is more difficult to distinguish, with a recall of 46.4%. The most visible off-diagonal errors mainly occur around neutral or semantically adjacent categories: Sadness is misclassified as Neutral by 18.4%, Anger is misclassified as Neutral by 13.0%, Inspiration is misclassified as Neutral by 12.1%, and Tenderness is misclassified as Inspiration by 9.2%. This pattern is reasonable for FACED because the dataset 22 Figure 2: Confusion matrix on FACED. Major confusions are concentrated among emotionally similar classes, reflecting the local similarity structure of affective space. 

> Figure 3: Confusion matrix on SEED-VII. The diagonal-dominant structure indicates that the model learns stable decision boundaries for most emotion categories.

contains fine-grained positive and negative categories as well as a neutral class, so several classes lie close to each other in affective semantics [28]. The SEED-VII confusion matrix exhibits stronger category overlap. Happy has a recall of 34.1% and is frequently predicted as Surprise by 28.5%. Sad is predicted as Surprise by 32.6%, while Surprise is also confused with Sad, Disgust, and Fear by 16.3%, 15.3%, and 14.3%, respectively. Anger is predicted as Neutral and Fear by 28.3% and 23.3%, and Neutral is predicted as Fear by 22.0%. These quantitative patterns show that the main errors are not uniformly distributed across all classes, but concentrate on several specific emotion pairs. 23 Figure 4: t-SNE visualization of stage-wise feature spaces on FACED. The three-stage comparison shows that MCRBlock-GCN and KANLinear progressively improve inter-class separability and intra-class com-pactness. 

> Figure 5: t-SNE visualization of stage-wise feature spaces on SEED-VII. Compared with the backbone output, the graph-enhanced and KAN-mapped representations show clearer class separation.

3.8.2. Feature Space Visualization 

To analyze how internal representations are gradually transformed into more dis-criminative emotional features, Figs. 4 and 5 show the t-SNE projections of three stages: backbone output, MCRBlock-GCN-enhanced features, and KAN-mapped fea-tures. A consistent trend is observed on both datasets. When only CBraMod is used, different emotional classes still overlap considerably in the low-dimensional space. After MCRBlock-GCN, class boundaries begin to separate. After the KAN mapping stage, both intra-class compactness and inter-class separability are further improved. 

3.8.3. Ablation Experiment Visualization 

To present the independent contributions of different modules more clearly, Fig. 6 visualizes the ablation results of FACED and SEED-VII as grouped bar charts. On both datasets, the KAN mapping layer brings consistent single-module gains, whereas 24 Figure 6: Visualization of ablation results on FACED and SEED-VII. The left panel corresponds to FACED and the right panel corresponds to SEED-VII. The grouped bars further illustrate the stable synergy between MCRBlock-GCN and KANLinear. 

> Figure 7: Visualization of the learnable adjacency matrix on FACED, including the learned connectivity heat map, the brain-topology graph, and the ranking of hub channels.

MCRBlock-GCN alone yields a smaller improvement. When both modules are com-bined, the full MSCGC-KAN model obtains the highest values among the ablation configurations. 

3.8.4. Learned Functional Connectivity Patterns 

To avoid excessive repetition of interpretability figures, representative visualiza-tions are presented on FACED in the main text, while the corresponding SEED-VII visualizations are provided in Appendix Appendix A as supplementary material. Fig. 7 visualizes the adjacency matrix, brain-topology graph, and channel hub ranking learned by the graph convolution module. Prefrontal-related channels appear among the highly connected hub nodes. The visualized graph also shows intra-prefrontal connections, prefrontal-temporal links, and cross-hemispheric connections. 25 Figure 8: Scalp topography visualization on FACED. Different emotions exhibit distinguishable spatial activation distributions, especially over prefrontal and temporal regions. 

3.8.5. Spatial Activation Topography 

Fig. 8 presents channel activation patterns from the perspective of scalp topogra-phy. The 32-channel FACED results show coarse-grained spatial activation layouts. Positive and negative emotions show different activation distributions over prefrontal and temporal regions. Neutral states show relatively more even activation patterns than several affective classes. 

3.8.6. Temporal Attention Analysis 

Fig. 9 shows the Grad-CAM temporal heat map on FACED. The high-response regions are not uniformly distributed along the whole signal. Instead, the responses concentrate on several local temporal windows. 

3.8.7. KAN Basis Function Visualization 

Fig. 10 presents the basis-response distributions and output-projection weight im-portance of the KAN layer on FACED. The linear, quadratic, sinusoidal, and hyperbolic tangent components show different response ranges and different projection-weight contributions. The visualization shows that multiple analytic basis functions partici-pate in the final feature mapping rather than only one dominant component. 26 Figure 9: Grad-CAM temporal heat map on FACED. High-response regions indicate the temporal segments that contribute most strongly to emotion classification. 

> Figure 10: Basis-response distributions and projection-weight importance of the KAN layer on FACED. The linear term and multiple nonlinear basis functions jointly contribute to emotion-discriminative mapping.

4. Discussion 

This paper focuses on the problem of downstream task-head design for EEG emo-tion recognition under the foundation-model fine-tuning setting. To address the limited spatiotemporal modeling and nonlinear discrimination ability of a simple linear head, MSCGC-KAN introduces multi-scale causal graph convolution and KAN-inspired analytic feature mapping after the pre-trained CBraMod backbone. The experi-mental results on FACED and SEED-VII show consistent improvements over the CBraMod+Linear baseline, with balanced-accuracy gains of 5.91 and 2.03 percentage points, respectively. These results indicate that the discriminative ability of pre-trained EEG representations can be further improved by a structured task-specific head without redesigning the backbone. 27 The practical significance of these results lies in the way MSCGC-KAN adapts foundation-model representations to a downstream affective task. Existing EEG foun-dation models provide a strong generic representation starting point, but emotion recognition still requires sensitivity to local temporal dynamics, inter-channel func-tional relations, and nonlinear class boundaries. A lightweight task head is therefore a useful compromise: it keeps the backbone largely intact, reduces the need for expen-sive re-pretraining, and still improves task-specific discrimination. This is particularly relevant for EEG emotion recognition, where the available labeled data are usually much smaller than the data used for large-scale pre-training. The results are also related to previous EEG emotion recognition studies that emphasize temporal, spatial, and graph-based modeling. Dynamic graph convolution methods have shown that adaptive channel-relation learning is useful for EEG emotion recognition [16]. Hierarchical spatial-temporal modeling has also been shown to help organize affective EEG features from local electrode patterns to broader brain-region representations [41]. The learned adjacency and topographic results in this paper show similar tendencies: prefrontal and temporal regions are repeatedly highlighted, and the learned graphs contain cross-region and cross-hemispheric connections. These observations are also compatible with neuroimaging evidence that emotion processing involves distributed and interactive brain mechanisms rather than isolated local activity [42]. Compared with previous task-specific EEG emotion models, the main difference of MSCGC-KAN is that the proposed modules are used as a downstream adaptation head on top of a pre-trained EEG backbone. Compared with a pure linear head, MCRBlock-GCN explicitly reorganizes the feature space through multi-scale temporal convolution and learnable graph convolution, while the KAN layer further expands the representation using multiple analytic basis functions. The ablation results support this design: KAN alone and MCRBlock-GCN alone both improve the baseline, but their combination produces the largest gains. This suggests that the two modules 28 are complementary, with graph-based spatiotemporal enhancement providing a better feature organization and analytic nonlinear mapping improving the final discriminative boundary. The visualization results further explain why the proposed method is more in-formative than a conventional classifier head. The confusion matrices show that the residual errors are concentrated among emotionally related classes, such as Sadness and Neutral on FACED and Happy, Sad, and Surprise on SEED-VII, rather than being randomly distributed. Similar confusion tendencies have also been reported in the SEED-VII dataset paper, where happy emotion tended to be misclassified as surprise and neutral emotion was easily confused with sadness [29]. These residual errors are also understandable from the circumplex model of affect, because nearby emo-tions may share similar valence or arousal characteristics [43]. The feature-space visualization shows progressively clearer class separation after MCRBlock-GCN and KAN mapping. The learned connectivity, scalp topography, temporal saliency, and KAN basis-response visualizations provide complementary evidence about where the model attends spatially, when it attends temporally, and how nonlinear feature mapping contributes internally. Therefore, MSCGC-KAN is not only more accurate than the linear-head baseline, but also provides richer evidence for interpreting the downstream adaptation process. 

4.1. Limitations and Future Work 

Although the proposed method produces stable gains, several limitations remain. First, the experiments are conducted on only two public emotion datasets, and further validation on more datasets and more downstream tasks is still needed to establish broader generalization. Secondly, the current choices of convolution kernel sizes and analytic basis functions are mainly experience-driven; more adaptive structure search or parameterized basis selection could be explored in future work. Thirdly, while the learnable adjacency matrix provides a useful degree of interpretability, its neurophys-29 iological meaning still requires deeper investigation through dedicated statistical tests and brain-region analyses. Finally, future extensions may incorporate hemispheric asymmetry attention, cross-patch temporal attention, and prototype-based contrastive constraints to introduce stronger neuroscientific priors and richer discriminative learn-ing into foundation-model fine-tuning. 

5. Conclusion 

This paper addressed the problem of downstream classification-head design in the context of EEG foundation models and proposed MSCGC-KAN, a new emo-tion recognition framework built around multi-scale causal graph convolution and Kolmogorov–Arnold feature mapping. Using CBraMod as the pre-trained backbone, the proposed method enhances multi-scale temporal modeling and spatial connectiv-ity modeling through MCRBlock-GCN and then improves nonlinear discrimination through the KAN mapping layer, while differential learning rates and stabilization strategies are used to complete high-quality fine-tuning. Experimental results on the public FACED and SEED-VII datasets show that the proposed method consistently outperforms a simple linear head and several representa-tive comparison models. Compared with the CBraMod+Linear baseline, the balanced accuracy is improved by 5.91 and 2.03 percentage points, respectively. These results indicate that designing a more structured and more expressive task head is an effective way to further improve EEG emotion recognition with pre-trained EEG represen-tations. In addition, the interpretability analyses provide evidence from functional connectivity, spatial activation patterns, temporal saliency, and nonlinear mapping be-havior, which enhances the transparency of the proposed framework. Future work will extend this line of research toward cross-subject transfer, online emotion recognition, and other brain–computer interface tasks. 30 Data availability 

The data analyzed in this study are from the public FACED and SEED-VII datasets cited in the manuscript. These third-party datasets are available from their original providers subject to the access policies and terms of use of the respective dataset owners. No new dataset was generated in this study, and the authors do not redistribute copies of the third-party datasets. 

References 

[1] G. Assuncao, B. Patrao, M. Castelo-Branco, P. Menezes, An overview of emotion in artificial intelligence, IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. 3 (6) (2022) 867–886. [2] T. Zhang, Y. Zong, W. Zheng, et al., Cross-database micro-expression recogni-tion: a benchmark, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 34 (2) (2022) 544–559. [3] Y. Lei, S. Yang, X. Wang, L. Xie, MsEmoTTS: Multi-scale emotion transfer, prediction, and control for emotional speech synthesis, IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process. 30 (2022) 853–864. [4] T. Zhang, X. Gong, C. L. P. Chen, BMT-Net: Broad multitask transformer network for sentiment analysis, IEEE Trans. Cybern. 52 (7) (2022) 6232–6243. [5] Q. She, X. Shi, F. Fang, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, Cross-subject EEG emotion recognition using multi-source domain manifold feature selection, Comput. Biol. Med. 159 (2023) 106860. doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106860 .[6] W.-L. Zheng, J.-Y. Zhu, B.-L. Lu, Identifying stable patterns over time for emotion recognition from EEG, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 10 (3) (2019) 417–429. [7] P. Samal, M. F. Hashmi, Role of machine learning and deep learning techniques in EEG-based BCI emotion recognition system: a review, Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (50) (2024). 31 [8] Y. Ding, S. Zhang, C. Tang, C. Guan, MASA-TCN: Multi-anchor space-aware temporal convolutional neural networks for continuous and discrete EEG emotion recognition, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 28 (7) (2024) 3953–3964. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2024.3392564 .[9] D. Li, B. Chai, Z. Wang, H. Yang, W. Du, EEG emotion recognition based on 3-d feature representation and dilated fully convolutional networks, IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 13 (4) (2021) 885–897. doi:10.1109/TCDS.2021.3051465 .[10] Z. Cheng, X. Bu, Q. Wang, T. Yang, J. Tu, EEG-based emotion recognition using multi-scale dynamic CNN and gated transformer, Scientific Reports 14 (2024) 31319. [11] Z. Jia, Y. Lin, J. Cai, et al., SST-EmotionNet: Spatial-spectral-temporal based attention 3D dense network for EEG emotion recognition, in: Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020. [12] W. Tao, C. Li, R. Song, et al., EEG-based emotion recognition via channel-wise attention and self attention, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 14 (1) (2023) 382–393. [13] R. Liu, Y. Chao, X. Ma, X. Sha, L. Sun, S. Li, S. Chang, ERTNet: an inter-pretable transformer-based framework for EEG emotion recognition, Frontiers in Neuroscience 18 (2024) 1320645. [14] G. Zhang, M. Yu, Y.-J. Liu, G. Zhao, D. Zhang, W. Zheng, SparseDGCNN: Rec-ognizing emotion from multichannel EEG signals, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 14 (1) (2023) 537–548. doi:10.1109/TAFFC.2021.3051332 .[15] P. Zhong, D. Wang, C. Miao, EEG-based emotion recognition using regularized graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 13 (3) (2022) 1290–1301. [16] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, Z. Cui, EEG emotion recognition using dynamical 32 graph convolutional neural networks, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 11 (3) (2020) 532–541. [17] W. Chen, Y. Liao, R. Dai, Y. Dong, L. Huang, EEG-based emotion recogni-tion using graph convolutional neural network with dual attention mechanism, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 18 (2024) 1416494. [18] R. Li, X. Yang, J. Lou, J. Zhang, A temporal-spectral graph convolutional neural network model for EEG emotion recognition within and across subjects, Brain Informatics 11 (30) (2024). [19] K. Shen, Q. She, X. Yang, Y. Gao, Y. Fan, Dynamic sparse directed graph convolutional network with attention mechanisms for EEG emotion recognition, Neurocomputing 658 (2025) 131749. [20] J. Wang, S. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Zhou, H. Jiang, S. Li, T. Li, G. Pan, CBraMod: A criss-cross brain foundation model for EEG decoding, in: Proc. ICLR, 2025. [21] C. Yang, D. Westover, Q. Sun, et al., BIOT: Biosignal transformer for cross-data learning in the wild, in: Proc. NeurIPS, 2023. [22] W. Jiang, L. Zhao, B. Lu, Large brain model for learning generic representations with tremendous EEG data in BCI, in: Proc. ICLR, 2024. [23] L. Wang, T. Suzumura, H. Kanezashi, GEFM: Graph-enhanced EEG foundation model, arXiv:2411.19507 (2024). [24] A. van den Oord, et al., WaveNet: A generative model for raw audio, arXiv:1609.03499 (2016). [25] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, et al., Going deeper with convolutions, in: Proc. IEEE Conf. CVPR, 2015, pp. 1–9. 33 [26] A. N. Kolmogorov, On the representation of continuous functions of many vari-ables by superposition of continuous functions of one variable and addition, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 114 (1957) 953–956. [27] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Vaidya, et al., KAN: Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks, arXiv:2404.19756 (2024). [28] J. Chen, X. Wang, C. Huang, et al., A large finer-grained affective computing EEG dataset, Scientific Data 10 (2023) 740. doi:10.1038/s41597-023-02650-w .[29] W.-B. Jiang, X.-H. Liu, W.-L. Zheng, B.-L. Lu, SEED-VII: A multimodal dataset of six basic emotions with continuous labels for emotion recognition, IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 16 (2) (2025) 969–985. doi:10.1109/ TAFFC.2024.3485057 .[30] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: Proc. ICLR, 2019. [31] V. J. Lawhern, A. J. Solon, N. R. Waytowich, S. M. Gordon, C. P. Hung, B. J. Lance, EEGNet: A compact convolutional neural network for EEG-based brain– computer interfaces, Journal of Neural Engineering 15 (5) (2018) 056013. [32] Y. Song, Q. Zheng, B. Liu, X. Gao, EEG conformer: Convolutional transformer for EEG decoding and visualization, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 31 (2023) 710–719. doi:10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3230250 .[33] J. Jing, W. Ge, S. Hong, M. B. Fernandes, Z. Lin, C. Yang, S. An, A. F. Struck, A. Herlopian, I. Karakis, et al., Development of expert-level classification of seizures and rhythmic and periodic patterns during EEG interpretation, Neurol-ogy 100 (17) (2023) e1750–e1762. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000207127 .[34] W. Y. Peh, Y. Yao, J. Dauwels, Transformer convolutional neural networks for 34 automated artifact detection in scalp EEG, in: Proc. 44th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2022, pp. 3599–3602. [35] H. Li, M. Ding, R. Zhang, C. Xiu, Motor imagery EEG classification algorithm based on CNN-LSTM feature fusion network, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 72 (2022) 103342. [36] Y. Song, X. Jia, L. Yang, L. Xie, Transformer-based spatial-temporal feature learning for EEG decoding, arXiv:2106.11170 (2021). [37] C. Yang, D. Xiao, M. B. Westover, J. Sun, Self-supervised EEG representation learning for automatic sleep staging, arXiv:2110.15278 (2021). [38] J. Wang, S. Zhao, Y. Zhou, Y. Kang, S. Li, G. Pan, DeeperBrain: A neuro-grounded EEG foundation model towards universal BCI, arXiv:2601.06134 (2026). [39] Y. Zhou, J. Wu, Z. Ren, Z. Yao, W. Lu, K. Peng, Q. Zheng, C. Song, W. Ouyang, C. Gou, CSBrain: A cross-scale spatiotemporal brain foundation model for EEG decoding, arXiv:2506.23075 (2025). [40] Y. E. Ouahidi, J. Lys, P. Thoelke, N. Farrugia, B. Pasdeloup, V. Gripon, K. Jerbi, G. Lioi, REVE: A foundation model for EEG–adapting to any setup with large-scale pretraining on 25,000 subjects, arXiv:2510.21585 (2025). [41] C. Cheng, W. Liu, L. Feng, Z. Jia, Emotion recognition using hierarchical spatial– temporal learning transformer from regional to global brain, Neural Networks 179 (2024) 106624. [42] P. Vuilleumier, G. Pourtois, Distributed and interactive brain mechanisms during emotion face perception: evidence from functional neuroimaging, Neuropsy-chologia 45 (1) (2007) 174–194. 35 [43] J. A. Russell, A circumplex model of affect, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39 (6) (1980) 1161–1178. 

Appendix A. Supplementary Interpretability Visualizations 

This appendix provides the SEED-VII interpretability visualizations that comple-ment the representative FACED visualizations in Section III. These figures are included as supplementary material to preserve the completeness of the analysis while keeping the main Results section concise. 

> Figure A.11: Supplementary visualization of the learnable adjacency matrix on SEED-VII, including the learned connectivity heat map, the brain-topology graph, and the ranking of hub channels.
> Figure A.12: Supplementary scalp topography visualization on SEED-VII.

36 Figure A.13: Supplementary Grad-CAM temporal heat map on SEED-VII. 

Figure A.14: Supplementary basis-response distributions and projection-weight importance of the KAN layer on SEED-VII. 

37