Title: LATERN: Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15054v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:26:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# LATERN: Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 

Mitchell Piehl 1 and Muchao Ye 1⋆

The University of Iowa, Iowa City IA 52245, USA 

mpiehl@uiowa.edu, muchao-ye@uiowa.edu 

Abstract. Vision-language models (VLMs) have recently emerged as a promising paradigm for video anomaly detection (VAD) due to their strong visual reasoning ability and natural language-based explainabil-ity. In this paper, we aim to address a key limitation of such pipelines, which perform segment-level inference independently owing to token con-straints and reason without structured temporal context, allowing VLMs to interpret anomalies as deviations from evolving video dynamics rather than producing fragmented predictions and explanations. To specify, we propose a context-aware framework named LATERN , which reformu-lates VAD as a temporal evidence aggregation process. LATERN con-sists of two complementary modules: Context-Aware Anomaly Scoring (CEA) and Recursive Evidence Aggregation (REA). CEA introduces a novel image-grounded memory mechanism, which selectively chooses historical content via frame diversity and visual-textual alignment as ex-panded context to help generate reliable anomaly scores. Building upon these scores, REA performs recursive temporal aggregation to identify coherent anomaly intervals and produce event-level decisions and expla-nations grounded in visual–textual evidence. Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks, including UCF-Crime and XD-Violence, show that LATERN enhances detection accuracy and explanation consis-tency for frozen VLMs during test time, while generating temporally coherent and semantically grounded event-level explanations. 

Keywords: Video Anomaly Detection · Vision Language Models 

1 Introduction 

Video anomaly detection (VAD) has received significant interest within the AI community due to its tremendous benefit in achieving automated decision-making for safety-critical applications, including video surveillance [22], medical diagnosis [6], and autonomous driving [34]. An ideal VAD system is expected to meet requirements on accuracy and explainability : to correctly localize the occurrence of video anomalies and generate truthful explanations for users. To achieve this vision, the research community has switched to using vision-language  

> ⋆

Corresponding author. 

> arXiv:2605.15054v1 [cs.CV] 14 May 2026

2 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye Step 1: CEA generates context-aware prediction scores Step 2: REA generates coherent score predictions and explanations        

> Current VAD methods retain a temporal modeling deficiency. They output inconsistent decisions over an anomalous event.
> Summary: Normal street traffic, few pedestrians
> Historical Context
> Gated Summary from CEA
> Event-based Explanation: Two men get into a physical altercation that includes punching and kicking.
> LATERN redesigns VAD as long-range context-aware temporal reasoning
> Previous methods (such as VERA) treat VAD as an isolated segment-level reasoning process
> COHERENT Predictions & Explanations
> (REA)
> Output: C & Ê m
> [m,r] [l,m]
> Event-Based Temporal Dynamics
> v1v4
> v3
> v2
> v1v2v3v4

Fig. 1: Illustration of the limitations of previous VAD methods using isolated segment-level reasoning compared to our proposed event-level reasoning pipeline using historical context and anomalous event aggregation. 

models (VLMs) [2,9,29] for VAD because they can perceive visual inputs, follow textual instructions, and generate verbalized prediction results. Existing studies have developed successful model adaptation strategies for VLMs in VAD, e.g., prompt engineering [33, 35, 37] during test time or fine-tuning [8, 40, 41] in training. However, they retain a temporal modeling deficiency in inference when the model is adapted : most current VLM-based methods [12, 33, 35, 37] map each video segment independently to expla-nations and numerical prediction scores in the language space for VAD because processing long untrimmed videos would exceed token limits. As shown in Fig. 1, this leads to a fundamental limitation in achieving accurate detection and ex-planations for existing methods: (1) Without global temporal context, VLMs may yield fragmented or partial anomaly assessments, leading to fluctuating anomaly scores (e.g. inconsistent anomaly scores over a long period covering a single anomalous event like fighting) and suboptimal detection performance. Additionally, (2) explanations for anomalous segments turn unreliable because explanations are generated for every given segment and can usually be inconsis-tent with neighboring segments (e.g., a single fight over a long period may be described in many different variations). To bridge this gap, we investigate the following fundamental yet largely unexplored research question: 

How can long-range video context be incorporated into VLM-based VAD to enable accurate and explainable reasoning during test time? 

We answer this research question by a principled framework that explicitly models temporal aggregation of anomaly evidence during test time for VLMs in VAD. The underlying intuition of our design is that anomalies are inher-ently context-dependent and must be interpreted relative to the global temporal dynamics of a video. To this end, we propose a novel framework named LAT-LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 3

ERN , redesigning VLM-based VAD as a long-range context-aware temporal reasoning process. LATERN includes two important modules: Context-Aware Anomaly Scoring ( CEA ) and Recursive Evidence Aggregation ( REA ). Firstly, CEA introduces an image-grounded memory module that accumulates long-range past segments and selectively aggregates informative ones as temporal evidence based on visual diversity as the extended context to generate historical summary during inference. In addition, CEA includes a gate mechanism in the memory based on visual–textual alignment to prevent inaccurate summaries from harming anomaly reasoning. This module ensures that VLMs perform anomaly reasoning in the current segment relative to a structured representation of prior video content. Secondly, the context-aware anomaly scores are used by REA to recursively partition the video into multi-scale anomaly window propos-als and getting coherent anomaly regions via structured evidence accumulation. Importantly, REA produces event-based explanations grounded in visual–textual evidence for each anomalous window. Thus, this module enables LATERN gen-erate stable predictions and temporally consistent explanations. By addressing context deficiency during test time and emphasizing temporal consistency in predictions, LATERN transforms VLM-based VAD from isolated segment rea-soning into structured, context-aware event understanding. Accordingly, we make the following key contributions: 

– To our knowledge, we are the first to introduce a context-aware principle for VLMs in VAD to address the key limitation of the existing paradigm in which VLMs conduct anomaly reasoning segment by segment with limited context. The proposed LATERN framework helps VLM reason over long range temporally during test time, mitigating fragmented predictions and producing coherent anomaly localization in challenging real-world videos. 

– Computationally, LATERN consists of two complementary modules (CEA and REA) to achieve this. CEA introduces an image-grounded memory with diversity-aware selection and visual–textual alignment gating to pro-duce reliable context-aware anomaly scores. Building upon these scores, REA performs hierarchical temporal evidence aggregation to identify coher-ent anomaly intervals and generate event-level explanations grounded in vi-sual–textual evidence. Together, the two modules transform vanilla segment-level inference into structured, temporally consistent anomaly reasoning. 

– Extensive experiments on large-scale VAD benchmarks including UCF-Crime and XD-Violence show that LATERN generates coherent event-level expla-nations grounded in anomaly evidence and significantly enhances detection performance with frozen VLM backbones during test time. 

2 Related Work 

Video Anomaly Detection. Detecting video anomalies is inherently challenging due to the ambiguous and context-dependent nature of what constitutes an anomaly compared to image anomalies [43]. Prior to VLMs, commonly used are task-specific deep neural networks trained with weakly supervised classification 4 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

tasks [26,28,31] or unsupervised frame reconstruction tasks [15,16,36]. However, they can only output numerical results and largely overlook the explainability aspect. To address this limitation, the recent line of literature introduces VLMs to generate predictions and explanations together. Prompt engineering [35, 37] or instruction tuning [17,27,33,40] is adopted to make VLM responsive to the in-struction for VAD. However, existing VLM-based methods typically conduct in-ference at the level of isolated temporal segments, as processing long untrimmed videos would exceed token limits. Consequently, such segment-level reasoning leads to fragmented predictions and context-limited explanations, especially for anomalies that can only be properly interpreted with broader temporal con-text. In contrast, our framework LATERN explicitly addresses this limitation by enabling structured temporal evidence aggregation, thereby bridging the gap between context-aware anomaly reasoning and VLM-based explainable VAD. 

Memory for LLMs/VLMs. Recent advances in agentic memory systems, such as A-Mem [32] and others [3, 18, 20, 23], demonstrate the effectiveness of textual memory for long-horizon reasoning. However, these approaches operate purely in the textual embedding space and lack direct access to visual evidence, potentially obscuring fine-grained appearance cues that are critical for VAD. Meanwhile, memory mechanisms proposed for general video understanding (e.g., Stream-Forest [38]) focus on holistic temporal knowledge accumulation for recognition or summarization, rather than modeling deviation-sensitive temporal dynam-ics [1, 24, 25, 39, 42]. As a result, existing memory paradigms are not well suited for VAD. In contrast, LATERN fills this gap with a memory design in CEA which is image-grounded, selectively updated, and explicitly validated through cross-modal alignment, enabling deviation-aware context modeling for VAD. 

Event-Level VAD Explanation. Recent VLM-based VAD approaches such as Holmes-VAU [41] and CUVA [4] have demonstrated their ability to generate event-level anomaly descriptions. However, this capability is primarily achieved through fine tuning of the deploying VLMs, which adapts model parameters to the target task. In contrast, our framework operates in a fully frozen VLM setting and does not rely on additional training, enabling coherent event-based explanation directly from test-time reasoning through structured temporal evi-dence aggregation. This distinction highlights a fundamentally different pathway toward explainable VAD, emphasizing test-time temporal reasoning. 

3 The LATERN Framework 

As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed LATERN framework will first expand tempo-ral context and then recursively refine, aggregate anomaly evidence for precise localization and explanation during test time. In § 3.1, we first provide a problem statement for VAD. After that, in § 3.2, we detail the Context-Awar e A nomaly Scoring mechanism (CEA) in LATERN empowered by a new memory mech-anism. Later, in § 3.3, we present Recursive Anomaly Evidence Aggregation (REA) in LATERN ,which progressively generate event-based temporal window to generate refined anomaly scores and natural language-based explanations. LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 51D temporal anomaly field of yi(ev) scores     

> yi(ev)
> From onset, peak, resolution
> The hallway is empty
> Cm= [50-74]
> ȳw& ȳ wmax criteria not met

Fig. 2: The proposed LATERN framework. Phase 1 (CEA) constructs and validates historical summaries for context-aware VLM inference. Phase 2 (REA) aggregates noisy, segment-level evidence via recursive binary partitioning temporally to identify coherent anomaly clusters, followed by multi-modal event-level explanation generation. 

3.1 Problem Formulation: VLMs for VAD during Test Time 

During inference in VAD, a video  V = {Ii}Fi=1  with  F frames is given, where  Ii is the i-th frame. Frame-level ground truth  Y = [ y1, . . . , y F ] is provided:  yi = 1  if  Ii

is part of an anomalous event, and  yi = 0  otherwise. The employed VLM f (base model) is expected to generate an anomaly score sequence ˆY = [ˆ y1, · · · , ˆyF ] for all frames, where each ˆyi ∈ [0 , 1](1 ≤ i ≤ F ). However, since F is huge, existing works [33, 35, 37] adopt a coarse-to-fine anomaly scoring process: After dividing a given video  V into h segments {vj }hj=1 (see § 4.1 for details), f will first generate initial scores for each video segment independently as a set of coarse-grained binary scores [˜ y1, · · · , ˜yh] by inputting a textual VAD-specific instruction 

θ and each vj to  f to generate an explanation Ej whether an anomaly exists and a binary value ˜yj ∈ { 0, 1}. After getting the coarse-grained binary scores 

{˜y1, · · · , ˜yh}, they are further refined by smoothing techniques (e.g., exponential moving average [33] and Gaussian smoothing [36]) to obtain a set of continuous anomaly scores for all frames as ˆY = [ˆ y1, . . . , ˆyF ]. The key limitation in such anomaly scoring process is that the initial anomaly scoring only considers limited context and can lead to misunderstanding, which has been shown in Fig. 1. 

3.2 CEA: Context-Aware Initial Anomaly Scoring 

As shown in Fig. 2, CEA maintains a visual memory to store historical segments associated with each current segment vi. By retrieving relevant memory entries, CEA constructs periodic context summaries that expand the temporal receptive field for initial anomaly scoring. The generated summaries are filtered through anomaly-aware criteria and selectively incorporated into the initial anomaly scor-ing process. This can be divided into four stages, as detailed as follows. 6 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

Stage 1: Dynamic Memory for Context Expansion. In any time step i, to con-struct the context summary for the current segment vi, we maintain a com-pact visual memory that stores representations of preceding segments Hi =

{vi−n, . . . , v i−1}, where n is the maximum number of historical segments retained in memory. For each previous segment vj ∈ Hi, we extract the ℓ2-normalized embedding of the center frame cj by a pretrained image encoder ψ(·), denoted as 

mj = ψ(cj )  

> ∥ψ(cj)∥2

, and mj ∈ Rd where d is the feature dimensionality. Consequently, each vi has a context expansion candidate pool Mi = {mi−n, · · · , m i−1}.

Stage 2: Key Frame Selection by Diversity. Directly aggregating all embeddings in Mi may introduce redundancy and dilute discriminative cues. Instead, CEA performs farthest-point sampling [7] in the embedding space to select a compact set of diverse key embeddings Si ⊂ Mi: Starting from an initial embedding, we iteratively select m∗ = arg max m∈Mi\S i min s∈S i ∥m − s∥2, thereby maximizing the minimum pairwise Euclidean distance within the selected set. This strategy explicitly encourages diversity among selected embeddings. The procedure yields up to K representative embeddings, providing a compact and diverse approxi-mation of the historical context for each segment vi.

Stage 3: Visual-Grounded Summary Generation. With the given historical con-text, CEA will generate summary as the expanded context periodically every S

segments, once at least three historical snippets are available. At each update step j, the selected key frames corresponding to Sj are fed into a VLM-based captioner Φ together with a strictly constrained prompt P, producing a sum-mary sj = Φ(Sj , P). The prompt P enforces four requirements: (i) describing only clearly observable visual content; (ii) avoiding speculation about intent, normality, or future events; (iii) stating uncertainty explicitly when evidence is insufficient; and (iv) producing concise responses with 2–4 short bullet points. Importantly, Φ is explicitly prohibited from labeling events as normal or anoma-lous, ensuring that the generated summary serves as objective visual memory rather than semantic judgment. 

Stage 4: Context-Aware Initial Scoring. Critically, CEA is aware that inaccurate or weakly aligned summaries may degrade prediction, so it includes a cross-modal grounding gate to assess summary validity before incorporating it into scoring: the generated summary is used to augment anomaly inference only when it is reliably grounded in the current visual content. To specify, given a set of uniformly sampled frames I(i) = {I(i) 

> k

}κk=1 from segment vi, CEA computes their ℓ2-normalized image embeddings {uk}κk=1 (κ is the number of frames) and the normalized text embedding ti of the generated summary si with CLIP [21]. Cosine similarities are computed as αk = u⊤ 

> k

ti for each frame I(i) 

> k

∈ uk and we derive two statistics: (1) Top- ˜K Mean Similarity : μi = 1˜K

P 

> k∈T i

αk, where 

Ti indexes the top- ˜K similarity values. This measures the strength of visual-text alignment. (2) Normalized Shannon Entropy : Hi = − 1log κ

Pκk=1 pk log pk,where pk = softmax( αk/τ ) with temperature τ . This quantifies the concentration of alignment evidence across frames. μi and Hi are in the range [0 , 1] .LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 7

In the gating mechanism, the summary is accepted only if μi > δ sim and 

Hi < δ ent , where δsim and δent are predefined thresholds, ensuring that it is both strongly aligned with the current segment and supported by concentrated visual evidence. Validated summaries are stored as part of the memory and used as context for subsequent segments. Otherwise, the system reverts to frame-only inference without historical context. When validated, the summary is prepended to the VAD prompt and treated as a concise description of prior segments, enabling the VLM to detect deviations in vi relative to historical context. This will safely extend temporal reasoning while mitigating error accumulation from unreliable summaries. In formulation, we have the initial score ˜yi and explanation 

Ei by 

(˜ yi, E i) = 



f (I(i), s i; P′

> score

), if μi > δ sim ∧ Hi < δ ent ,f (I(i); Pscore ), otherwise ,

(1) where Pscore denotes the prompt for initial anomaly scoring without summarized context, while P′ 

> score

augments this prompt with the validated summary si as historical context. Ei is the corresponding explanation for why f assigns ˜yi for 

vi by following the prompt instruction. 

Discussion: Computational Insight in CEA. The introduction of memory-based CEA is necessary because existing memory paradigms are not directly suited for VAD (validated in results shown in Table 3): (1) Trending text-centric agentic memory systems such as A-Mem [32] and Mem0 [3] maintain and retrieve infor-mation purely in the textual embedding space. While effective for long-horizon language reasoning, they cannot perceive visual information and the abstracted historical information obscures subtle appearance-level cues that are crucial for VAD. (2) In addition, existing memory mechanisms proposed for general video understanding, such as StreamForest [38], primarily focus on accumulating tem-poral knowledge for recognition or summarization. However, these memory sys-tems are designed for holistic semantic accumulation and do not focus on the semantic change in the video. Contrastively, the used summary from the memory in CEA remains image-grounded, selectively updated, and explicitly validated through cross-modal alignment, ensuring high utility in VAD. 

3.3 REA: Recursive Evidence Aggregation for Anomaly Reasoning 

As shown in Fig. 2, on top of CEA, LATERN further includes a Recursive Anomaly Evidence Aggregation (REA) algorithm that aggregates weak local anomaly evidence into coherent temporal intervals. Rather than treating VAD as independent segment inference, LATERN reinterprets it as a temporal evidence aggregation problem, which can be described into 4 stages: 

Stage 1: Temporal Evidence Field Construction. Based on Eq. (1), CEA com-putes a continuous evidence-based anomaly score y(ev ) 

> i

∈ [0 , 1] by considering both ˜yi and Ei, i.e., 

y(ev ) 

> i

= α˜yi + γ · Cue (Ei) − δ · Neg (Ei), (2) 8 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

where ˜yi ∈ { 0, 1} is the context-expanded anomaly indicator obtained from Eq. (1), Cue (Ei) ∈ Z≥0 counts the number of matches to predefined anomaly-cue keywords in the explanation Ei, and Neg (Ei) ∈ Z≥0 counts the number of matches to predefined anomaly-denial keywords in Ei. The keyword sets are dataset-agnostic and fixed across all datasets. α, γ, and δ are weighting coeffi-cients (hyperparameters). Eq. (2) will produce a continuous anomaly evidence landscape over time that integrates two complementary sources: (i) the implicit inference results output from f indicated by ˜yi, and (ii) the explicit causal infer-ence expressed by f indicated by Ei either supporting or contradicting evidence. Such score assignment will express f ’s belief on the existence of an anomaly more faithfully. 

Stage 2: Anomalous Window Proposals. Given the segment-level initial scores 

[y(ev )1 , · · · , y (ev ) 

> h

] by iterating Eq. (2) from i = 1 to h, REA constructs temporal window proposals via recursive binary partitioning. To specify, starting from the full interval W (0) = [0 , h ], REA iteratively splits each window W = [ istart , i end ]

at its midpoint imid =  istart +iend 

> 2

, yielding two sub-windows [istart , i mid ] and 

[imid + 1 , i end ]. Specifically, in the general case, given any proposed window W =[istart , i end ] (0 ≤ istart < i end ≤ h) covering from the istart -th segment to the 

iend -th segment, REA computes statistics to represent the anomaly potential: 

¯yW = 1

|W |

X

> i∈W

y(ev ) 

> i

, ymax  

> W

= max  

> i∈W

y(ev ) 

> i

, (3) In practice, a window is considered anomalous if it exhibits either a suffi-ciently strong local peak ( ymax  

> W

) or sustained anomaly ( ¯yW ). High ymax  

> W

indicates the presence of a sharp anomalous peak within W , while ¯yW reflects the persis-tence or density of anomalous evidence across segments. This recursive binary partitioning proceeds only along windows that satisfy the anomaly criteria in Eq. (3). Recursion along a branch terminates when ei-ther (1) the window length |W | falls below a predefined minimum size lmin , (2) a maximum recursion depth dmax is reached, or (3) the window no longer sat-isfies the anomaly criteria. Such hierarchical splitting produces a multi-scale set of candidate temporal intervals corresponding to clusters of anomaly evidence. Meanwhile, adjacent or overlapping candidate intervals generated by recursion are subsequently merged to enforce temporal continuity before ranking. Please see Appendix A for pseudocodes and more details. 

Stage 3: Dynamic Proposal Selection. If the initial window W (0) fails the anomaly criteria defined by ¯yW and ymax  

> W

, recursion stops and no further subdivision is performed. Otherwise, when it is terminated, candidate windows are ranked according to their cumulative anomaly evidence: 

S(l, r ) = 

> r

X

> i=l

y(ev ) 

> i

, (4) Candidate windows are ranked according to their cumulative anomaly evi-dence in Eq. (4), and the Top-Kmax highest-scoring intervals are retained. The LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 9

final anomalous regions selected for further investigation are 

C = {Cm = [ lm, r m]}Kmax  

> m=1

, (5) which contains a set of Kmax anomalous windows for video V .

Stage 4: Event-Based Explanation-Augmented VAD. Based on segment-level initial scores [y(ev )1 , · · · , y (ev ) 

> h

], LATERN gets a new set of frame-level scores 

ˆY (ev ) = [ˆ y(ev )1 , . . . , ˆy(ev ) 

> F

] by following the coarse-to-fine score post-processing in VERA [35] as the desired output for VAD. The difference lies in that LATERN 

will output a new set of event-based explanations for the test video V given the set C output from Eq. (5). Specifically, let Cm = [ lm, r m] denote an anomalous interval discovered by REA. Rather than generating explanations independently per segment like existing pipelines, LATERN treats the frames spanning the cluster Cm as a coherent event and derive the text description from previous representative segment explanations. Recall that for each segment vi we store a single textual explanation Ei produced by f during inference in Eq. (1). To ground the generated event-level explanation in the internal evidence pattern of Cm, REA selects representative segments Sm ⊆ [lm, r m] with all segments satisfying any of the following criteria to capture its onset, peak intensity, and temporal extent (with maximum 10 segments): (1) the segment locates in the temporal boundaries, (2) the segment contains high evidence scores y(ev ) 

> i

, or (3) the segment is from transition segments that mark onset and resolution. After that, REA will generate visual–textual grounded event-level ex-planation . To specify, for an anomaly cluster Cm, we sample κ representative frames uniformly across its temporal span (denoted {I(i) 

> m

}κi=1 ) and pair them with the textual evidence { Ei | i ∈ S m }. These multi-modal inputs well repre-sent the event, and an event-level explanation is then generated by: 

ˆEm = f ({I(i) 

> m

}κi=1 , {Ei|i ∈ S m}; Pcaption ), (6) where Pcaption is a prompt instructing f to produce a concise ( ≤ 4 sentence) narrative strictly grounded in the provided evidence. By enforcing both visual anchoring and evidence selection, the generated explanation remains aligned with the underlying anomaly cluster. 

Discussion: Computational Insight in REA. When we iterate Eq. (6) for all iden-tified anomalous windows, LATERN will output the desired event-based expla-nation and accurate anomaly scores, as validated by quantitative and qualitative results in § 4. Importantly, under this formulation, localization and explanation are not disjoint stages but two complementary operations over the same tem-poral anomaly evidence field. That is, explanations from LATERN are derived directly from the temporal structure uncovered by recursive evidence aggregation based on temporal anomaly field {y(ev ) 

> i

}hi=1 . This unified design promotes tem-poral coherence, reduces redundancy inherent in segment-level rationales, and ensures that each explanation is explicitly grounded in the anomaly evidence that triggered its selection. 10 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

4 Experiments and Results 

We evaluate three aspects of LATERN : (Q1) Accurate Detection : Does the proposed LATERN improve VAD performance? (Q2) Faithful Explainabil-ity : Does LATERN provide event-based explanations that are more consistent and informative than existing VAD reasoning? And (Q3) Modular Effective-ness : Do CEA and REA in LATERN produce reliable context-aware anomaly scores and convert fragmented predictions into temporally coherent anomaly intervals? 

4.1 Experimental Settings 

Datasets. We evaluate model performance on two large-scale benchmarks: UCF-Crime [26] and XD-Violence [30] following recent studies [35, 37]. UCF-Crime contains 13 anomaly types and a test set of 290 videos (140 abnormal), with an average duration of 2.13 mins. XD-Violence contains 6 anomaly categories and a test set of 800 videos (500 abnormal), with an average duration of 1.62 mins. 

Baselines. We adopt representative explainable VAD methods including Holmes-VAD [40], LAVAD [37], LLAVA [14], VADor [17], and VERA [35] as baselines. For explainability, we compare our event-level explanations to three baseline segment-level explanations from VERA within the predicted anomaly event: the most anomalous segment according to Eq. (2), a random segment explanation, and concatenated segment-level explanations. Please note that since pre-vious methods [35, 37] have proved the effectiveness of using frozen VLMs without instruction tuning or fine-tuning in VAD, the perfor-mance is reported with frozen VLMs .

Evaluation metrics. For detection accuracy, we report frame-level Area Un-der the ROC Curve (AUC) on both datasets and Average Precision (AP) on XD-Violence following standard VAD practice. For explainability, since those benchmarks do not provide ground truth textual rationales, we evaluate gen-erated explanations (with 200 random examples drawn from UCF-Crime) with three complementary proxies: (i) Human preference (%), where human raters choose which explanation better describes the anomalous event while staying faithful to visible evidence; (ii) Conciseness measured by average token length; and (iii) Descriptiveness measured by anomaly-category prediction accuracy (%), where an external LLM predicts the anomaly class given only the generated explanation text without frames. This measures whether explanations contain discriminative event details rather than generic anomaly statements. 

Implementation details. By default, we use InternVL2-8B as the base VLM f

for LATERN as [35] does. Videos are partitioned into temporal segments every 16 frames as [35, 37] do, each represented by κ = 8 uniformly sampled frames. For CEA, the image encoder ψ(·) is ResNet-50 to extract the embeddings. We retain at most n = 8 historical segment embeddings in memory and select K = 4 

diverse key frames. Summaries are refreshed every S = 5 segments and generated by a VLM captioner Φ (InternVL2-8B). For grounding, each current segment uses κ = 8 sampled frames to compute image-text alignment with the summary LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 11                          

> Table 1: Comparison with leading explainable VAD methods. Performance is reported using frozen VLMs without any instruction tuning or fine-tuning because frozen VLMs have been shown to be effective for VAD tasks by [35, 37]. †Note that Holmes-VAD requires limited task-specific training, and is therefore not strictly frozen. AUC (%) AUC (%) AP (%) Method UCF-Crime XD-Violence Holmes-VAD [40] †84.61 Not Reported 84.96
> LAVAD [37] 80.28 85.36 62.01 LLAVA-1.5 [13] 72.84 79.62 50.26 VADor [17] 85.90 Not Reported Not Reported VERA [35] 86.55 88.26 70.54
> LATERN (Our Approach) 87.63 90.14 74.68

with CLIP embeddings; we adopt the gating thresholds (δsim , δ ent ) = (0 .30 , 0.80) 

unless otherwise stated. For REA, it retains at most kmax = 6 proposals. 

4.2 Comparison in Accuracy and Explainability 

We first answer (Q1) by comparing LATERN with state-of-the-art explain-able VAD methods. The results are shown in Table 1. The frame-level AUC on both datasets on Table 1 shows that LATERN achieves the best AUC perfor-mance on UCF-Crime and XD-Violence, improving over the strongest baseline VERA [35] by +1.08% and +1.88% AUC points respectively. In addition, LAT-ERN obtains a 4.14% AP improvement over VERA. Compared to VERA, LAT-ERN employs the context-expanded and evidence-grounded scoring formulation in Eq. (1). These results support our central hypothesis that anomalies are best detected as deviations from an evolving temporal narrative and demonstrates the effectiveness of incorporating structured temporal context into anomaly in-ference. We next answer (Q2) on whether event-level explanations by LATERN 

are of higher quality. Table 2 compares our event-level explanations with sev-eral segment-level alternatives by VERA: the explanation from the single most anomalous segment, a random anomalous segment, and concatenation of all segment explanations within the detected event by LATERN . Results show that event-level explanations from LATERN are strongly preferred by humans (80.5%) while being substantially shorter (46.6 tokens on average), suggesting they better capture the complete event than a narrow or noisy snapshot. They also achieve the highest category-prediction accuracy (27.91%), indicating that aggregating evidence across the anomalous window yields more discriminative descriptions than isolated segments. As for the concatenation baseline, although it achieves relatively high prediction accuracy, the explanation is prohibitively long (2409.5 tokens), which highlights the necessity of introducing structured temporal aggregation for explanation semantics as LATERN does. 12 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye                                                

> Table 2: We compare the event-level explanations generated by LATERN with pre-vious segment-level explanations generated by VERA on human evaluation preference percentage, anomaly category prediction accuracy, and average token length. Explanation Type Human Eval. (%) Pred. Acc. (%) Token Length Event-Level 80.5 27.91 46.6
> Most Anomalous Segment-Level 11.5 24.62 68.9 Random Segment-Level 6.0 16.26 71.2 All Segment-Level Concatenated 2.0 26.37 2409.5
> Table 3: Experiment results verifying methodology design in LATERN on UCF-Crime. Left: Ablation study results on CEA. Right: Ablation study results on REA.
> CEA Ablations
> Method AUC (%) InternVL2-8B (Base) 86.42 + Non-gated Summaries 84.72 + KLE [19] Gated 86.28 + Shannon Entropy Gated 86.61 + Similarity Gated 85.86 + Similarity & Entropy Gated 86.68
> A-Mem-Based Frame Retrieval 84.07 StreamForest Compression 78.73
> REA Ablations
> Method AUC (%) REA 87.63
> – w/o α˜yi67.02 – w/o γ·Cue (Ei)87.60 – w/o δ·Neg (Ei)87.32 – w/o γCue (Ei)−δNeg (Ei)87.36 – w/o Dynamic Selection 86.77 Non-Gated Summaries + REA 85.26 No Summaries + REA 87.14

4.3 Ablation Studies for Methodology Design 

Without loss of generality, we perform ablation studies with InternVL2-8B as 

f on UCF-Crime to answer (Q3), with results shown in Table 3. We derive the following findings: (1) Gating in CEA is essential for reliable context expansion. Directly incorpo-rating historical summaries without validation degrades performance (Non-gated Summaries: 84.72% vs. Base: 86.42% in AUC), indicating that unfiltered context may introduce error accumulation from misaligned or weakly grounded memory. In contrast, the proposed similarity- and entropy-based grounding gate restores and further improves performance (86.68%), demonstrating that contextual ex-pansion is beneficial only when supported by strong visual–text alignment. (2) More complex language-level uncertainty measures do not necessarily trans-late to improved cross-modal grounding in CEA. We further investigate dif-ferent grounding strategies for context validation. Kernel Language Entropy (KLE) [19], which is an expansion of semantic entropy [5, 10, 11] used for uncer-tainty estimation in language models, achieves 86.28% AUC, which is inferior to both Shannon entropy gating (86.61%) and the proposed similarity–entropy joint gating (86.68%). Thus, directly modeling visual–text alignment concentra-LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 13       

> Table 4: Average number of predicted anomalous events per video on UCF-Crime. Method w/ Summaries from CEA w/o Summaries from CEA With Aggregation 2.53 2.19 Without Aggregation 14.92 13.91

tion via entropy over similarity scores provides a more effective signal for filtering unreliable summaries. 

(3) Image-grounded and deviation-aware mechanisms are important for memory design in CEA. We additionally compare against text-centric memory mecha-nisms (A-Mem retrieval [32]) and memory frameworks designed for general video understanding (StreamForest [38]). Despite their increased computational over-head, these methods underperform our approach, demonstrating that effective memory design for VAD must be both image-grounded and explicitly deviation-aware as the one proposed in CEA. 

(4) Each component in REA contributes to robust temporal aggregation. The full use of REA achieves the best performance (87.63% AUC). Removing any core component consistently degrades performance. In particular, eliminating the anomalous score weighting ( ˜yi) leads to a dramatic drop to 67.02%, indicating that segment-level anomaly evidence is fundamental to effective aggregation. Removing the cue-word evidence term Cue (Ei) results in a slight decrease to 87.60%, while removing the negative evidence term Neg (Ei) lowers performance to 87.32%. Disabling dynamic proposal selection causes a more noticeable re-duction to 86.77%, highlighting its importance in suppressing spurious intervals and enforcing temporal coherence. These results confirm that each component plays a complementary role in structured evidence aggregation. Furthermore, REA remains effective even without using summaries (87.14%), outperforming gated summaries alone (86.68%), demonstrating that recursive temporal aggregation itself substantially improves localization stability. How-ever, combining REA with non-gated summaries significantly harms performance (85.26%), reinforcing that reliable context validation is essential for LATERN .

(5) Event-level aggregation in REA reduces temporal fragmentation. Segment-wise VAD predictions produce many short, fragmented anomaly intervals across adjacent video segment. Contrastingly, LATERN overcomes this dilemma with REA: Additional results shown in Table 4 demonstrate that REA dramatically reduces the number of predicted anomalous intervals per video (e.g., from 14.92 to 2.53 when summaries are used), indicating that REA suppresses transient spikes and consolidates evidence into coherent event windows. Importantly, this is achieved without sacrificing detection accuracy and can help improve the ex-planation quality, as § 4.2 have shown. 

4.4 Qualitative Results and Case Studies 

We would like to provide qualitative results as follows to demonstrate the ef-fectiveness of LATERN in generating event-based explanations. First, Fig. 3a 14 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye Score: 1 The video shows a large amount of smoke, which is not typical for the environment. There are no visible people, vehicles, or objects in the video. The smoke could indicate an anomaly 

> Score: 0 The video shows a person walking in a hallway, which is not an unusual activity. There are no vehicles or objects in unusual positions. There is no visible damage. Based on the analysis, there is no anomaly in the video.
> Score: 0 The video shows a person carrying a bag in a hallway, which is not an unusual activity. There is no visible damage or unusual movement, and no unusual sounds or noises. Based on the analysis, there is no anomaly in the video.
> Score: 1 There is a person in the video who is not in their typical position, and there is visible damage in the video that indicates an anomaly.
> Score: 1 There is a person in the video who is not in their typical position, and there is visible damage and unusual movement that indicates an anomaly.

Predicted Anomalous Event 

> Event-Based Explanation
> The video shows a person entering a room and then a fire breaking out, with visible damage and unusual movement indicating an anomaly. The person is carrying a bag and seems to be moving in a way that is not typical for someone in that environment. The fire is a sudden and unexpected event, causing visible damage and smoke, which is not typical for the scene.

Baseline VERA produces independent segment-level explanations 

LATERN produces coherent event-level explanations 

Anomaly Event 

Time Index 

> Selected Keyframes

(a) Qualitative Example of video “Ar-son041_x264” in UCF-Crime comparing gen-erated segment-level explanations to event-level explanations by LATERN .Raw Input: Temporally noisy and fragmented anomaly predictions resulting from isolated segment-level reasoning. 

Aggregation: Computes continuous soft evidence y i(ev) from multimodal cues (blue line), and identifies candidate anomaly clusters via recursive temporal localization (grey highlights). 

Ground truth anomaly scores 

Dynamic Interval Selection: Retains the top-k temporal intervals according to their cumulative anomaly evidence 

S(l,r ). 

(b) REA can generate anomalous event intervals given initial segment-level anomaly scores which bet-ter aligns with ground truth anomaly scores. 

Fig. 3: (1) Comparison between segment-level and event-level explanations produced by LATERN . (2) REA converts fluctuating segment scores into coherent anomaly intervals aligned with ground truth. 

illustrates that existing methods (exemplified by VERA) output segment-level explanations which fluctuate across neighboring segments and often provide par-tial, inconsistent descriptions of the same underlying event. In contrast, LAT-ERN produces a single event-level explanation aligned with the temporally con-solidated anomaly interval, summarizing onset, evolution, and the key visible evidence. This qualitative behavior mirrors our quantitative results: LATERN 

improves temporal coherence, and cluster-level semantic aggregation produces explanations that are shorter yet more informative than segment-level rationales. Additionally, Fig. 3b takes an exemplary video (“Burglary032_x264” in UCF-Crime) to illustrate how REA transforms unstable segment-level predictions into coherent event-level anomaly localization. The initial context-aware scores ex-hibit noticeable fluctuations across adjacent segments, producing fragmented high-response regions. Through recursive evidence aggregation, REA generates multiple candidate anomaly windows at different temporal scales, progressively organizing dispersed anomaly signals into structured clusters. After dynamic interval selection, spurious short intervals are suppressed, and the remaining window forms a temporally coherent anomaly region that closely aligns with the ground-truth event boundaries. 

5 Concluding Remarks 

Overall, LATERN demonstrates that effective video anomaly detection with VLMs requires moving beyond isolated segment-level reasoning toward struc-tured temporal evidence aggregation. By integrating image-grounded memory with recursive interval-level reasoning, LATERN bridges detection and expla-nation under a unified context-aware formulation. Extensive experimental re-sults on representative benchmarks demonstrate that incorporating structured temporal aggregation substantially enhances frozen VLMs, highlighting the po-tential of temporally coherent and context-aware reasoning for complex video understanding. LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 15 

References 

1. Chen, J., Lv, Z., Wu, S., Lin, K.Q., Song, C., Gao, D., Liu, J.W., Gao, Z., Mao, D., Shou, M.Z.: Videollm-online: Online video large language model for streaming video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18407–18418 (2024) 2. Chen, Z., Wu, J., Wang, W., Su, W., Chen, G., Xing, S., Zhong, M., Zhang, Q., Zhu, X., Lu, L., et al.: Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In: CVPR (2024) 3. Chhikara, P., Khant, D., Aryan, S., Singh, T., Yadav, D.: Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 (2025) 4. Du, H., Zhang, S., Xie, B., Nan, G., Zhang, J., Xu, J., Liu, H., Leng, S., Liu, J., Fan, H., Huang, D., Feng, J., Chen, L., Zhang, C., Li, X., Zhang, H., Chen, J., Cui, Q., Tao, X.: Uncovering what, why and how: A comprehensive benchmark for causation understanding of video anomaly. In: 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 18793–18803 (2024). 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01778 

5. Farquhar, S., Kossen, J., Kuhn, L., Gal, Y.: Detecting hallucinations in large lan-guage models using semantic entropy. Nature 630 (8017), 625–630 (2024) 6. Fernando, T., Gammulle, H., Denman, S., Sridharan, S., Fookes, C.: Deep learning for medical anomaly detection–a survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54 (7), 1–37 (2021) 7. Gonzalez, T.F.: Clustering to minimize the maximum intercluster distance. Theo-retical Computer Science 38 , 293–306 (1985) 8. Huang, C., Wang, B., Wang, W., Wen, J., Liu, C., Shen, L., Cao, X.: Vad-r1: Towards video anomaly reasoning via perception-to-cognition chain-of-thought. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 9. Hurst, A., Lerer, A., Goucher, A.P., Perelman, A., Ramesh, A., Clark, A., Os-trow, A., Welihinda, A., Hayes, A., Radford, A., et al.: Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 (2024) 10. Kossen, J., Han, J., Razzak, M., Schut, L., Malik, S., Gal, Y.: Semantic en-tropy probes: Robust and cheap hallucination detection in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15927 (2024) 11. Kuhn, L., Gal, Y., Farquhar, S.: Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invari-ances for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664 (2023) 12. Lee, H., Kim, H., Kim, I.J., Choi, Y.: Flashback: Memory-driven zero-shot, real-time video anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15205 (2025) 13. Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y., Lee, Y.J.: Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning. In: CVPR (2024) 14. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning. In: NeurIPS (2024) 15. Liu, W., Luo, W., Lian, D., Gao, S.: Future frame prediction for anomaly detection– a new baseline. In: CVPR (2018) 16. Lu, C., Shi, J., Jia, J.: Abnormal event detection at 150 fps in matlab. In: ICCV (2013) 17. Lv, H., Sun, Q.: Video anomaly detection and explanation via large language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05702 (2024) 18. Maharana, A., Lee, D.H., Tulyakov, S., Bansal, M., Barbieri, F., Fang, Y.: Evalu-ating very long-term conversational memory of llm agents. In: Proceedings of the 16 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 13851–13870 (2024) 19. Nikitin, A., Kossen, J., Gal, Y., Marttinen, P.: Kernel language entropy: Fine-grained uncertainty quantification for llms from semantic similarities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 8901–8929 (2024) 20. Packer, C., Fang, V., Patil, S., Lin, K., Wooders, S., Gonzalez, J.: Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. (2023) 21. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: ICML (2021) 22. Ramachandra, B., Jones, M.J., Vatsavai, R.R.: A survey of single-scene video anomaly detection. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 

44 (5), 2293–2312 (2020) 23. Rasmussen, P., Paliychuk, P., Beauvais, T., Ryan, J., Chalef, D.: Zep: a temporal knowledge graph architecture for agent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13956 (2025) 24. Shen, X., Xiong, Y., Zhao, C., Wu, L., Chen, J., Zhu, C., Liu, Z., Xiao, F., Varadarajan, B., Bordes, F., et al.: Longvu: Spatiotemporal adaptive compression for long video-language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17434 (2024) 25. Song, E., Chai, W., Wang, G., Zhang, Y., Zhou, H., Wu, F., Chi, H., Guo, X., Ye, T., Zhang, Y., et al.: Moviechat: From dense token to sparse memory for long video understanding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18221–18232 (2024) 26. Sultani, W., Chen, C., Shah, M.: Real-world anomaly detection in surveillance videos. In: CVPR (2018) 27. Tang, J., Lu, H., Wu, R., Xu, X., Ma, K., Fang, C., Guo, B., Lu, J., Chen, Q., Chen, Y.C.: Hawk: Learning to understand open-world video anomalies. In: NeurIPS (2024) 28. Tian, Y., Pang, G., Chen, Y., Singh, R., Verjans, J.W., Carneiro, G.: Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal feature magnitude learn-ing. In: ICCV (2021) 29. Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Fan, Y., Dang, K., Du, M., Ren, X., Men, R., Liu, D., Zhou, C., Zhou, J., Lin, J.: Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 (2024) 30. Wu, P., Liu, J., Shi, Y., Sun, Y., Shao, F., Wu, Z., Yang, Z.: Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence detection under weak supervision. In: ECCV (2020) 31. Wu, P., Zhou, X., Pang, G., Zhou, L., Yan, Q., Wang, P., Zhang, Y.: Vadclip: Adapting vision-language models for weakly supervised video anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 38, pp. 6074–6082 (2024) 32. Xu, W., Liang, Z., Mei, K., Gao, H., Tan, J., Zhang, Y.: A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. NeurIPS (2025) 33. Yang, Y., Lee, K., Dariush, B., Cao, Y., Lo, S.Y.: Follow the rules: Reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models. In: ECCV (2024) 34. Yao, Y., Wang, X., Xu, M., Pu, Z., Wang, Y., Atkins, E., Crandall, D.J.: Dota: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in driving videos. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 45 (1), 444–459 (2022) 35. Ye, M., Liu, W., He, P.: Vera: Explainable video anomaly detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models. In: CVPR (2025) LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 17 36. Ye, M., Peng, X., Gan, W., Wu, W., Qiao, Y.: Anopcn: Video anomaly detection via deep predictive coding network. In: ACM international conference on multimedia (2019) 37. Zanella, L., Menapace, W., Mancini, M., Wang, Y., Ricci, E.: Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection. In: CVPR (2024) 38. Zeng, X., Qiu, K., Zhang, Q., Li, X., Wang, J., Li, J., Yan, Z., Tian, K., Tian, M., Zhao, X., et al.: Streamforest: Efficient online video understanding with persistent event memory. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 39. Zhang, H., Wang, Y., Tang, Y., Liu, Y., Feng, J., Dai, J., Jin, X.: Flash-vstream: Memory-based real-time understanding for long video streams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08085 (2024) 40. Zhang, H., Xu, X., Wang, X., Zuo, J., Han, C., Huang, X., Gao, C., Wang, Y., Sang, N.: Holmes-vad: Towards unbiased and explainable video anomaly detection via multi-modal llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12235 (2024) 41. Zhang, H., Xu, X., Wang, X., Zuo, J., Huang, X., Gao, C., Zhang, S., Yu, L., Sang, N.: Holmes-vau: Towards long-term video anomaly understanding at any granular-ity. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 13843–13853 (2025) 42. Zhang, P., Zhang, K., Li, B., Zeng, G., Yang, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Tan, H., Li, C., Liu, Z.: Long context transfer from language to vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16852 (2024) 43. Zhu, J., Ong, Y.S., Shen, C., Pang, G.: Fine-grained abnormality prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 22241–22251 (2025) 18 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

Algorithm 1 Context-Aware Anomaly Scoring (CEA) 

Require: Video V , segment index set {ti}hi=1 , summary stride S, minimum history length mmin , history capacity M

Ensure: Segment-level predictions {(ˆ yi, r i, u i)}hi=1 

1: Initialize history buffer H ← ∅ 

2: Initialize history summary u ← “No prior events observed yet” 3: Initialize snippet counter c ← 0

4: for i = 1 to h do 

5: Extract current temporal segment xi from V centered at ti

6: Sample frames from xi and construct segment visual input 7: Select representative frame ˜xi from xi

8: Update history buffer: H ← UpdateHistory (H, ˜xi, t i, M )

9: c ← c + 1 

10: use_summary ← False 

11: if |H| ≥ mmin and (c mod S) = 0 then 

12: u ← SummarizeHistory (H)

13: use_summary ← GroundAndGate (u, H)

14: end if 

15: if use_summary then 

16: (ˆ yi, r i) ← ScoreWithSummary (xi, u )

17: else 

18: (ˆ yi, r i) ← ScoreOriginal (xi)

19: end if 

20: end for 

21: return {(ˆ yi, r i, u i)}hi=1 

# Supplementary Material for 

LATERN: Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection A Pseudocodes 

This section provides pseudocode for the proposed Context-Aware Anomaly Scoring (CEA) and Recursive Evidence Aggregation (REA) procedures. Given a sequence of temporal segments S = {si}hi=1 , CEA first performs context-aware segment-level anomaly analysis by maintaining a bounded history of prior seg-ments, periodically generating a history summary, and using the summary only when it is sufficiently grounded in the visual history. The resulting segment-level predictions and corresponding VLM responses are then refined by REA, which recursively identifies candidate anomalous intervals and aggregates evi-dence across neighboring segments. Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall CEA pipeline. For each segment, the method updates the history buffer with a representative frame from the current segment. When sufficient history has been accumulated and the summary refresh stride is met, CEA generates a concise summary of prior events and uses it LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 19 

Algorithm 2 Recursive Evidence Aggregation (REA) 

Require: Segment predictions S = {si}hi=1 , maximum intervals Kmax , minimum win-dow length lmin , maximum recursion depth dmax , merge gap δ

Ensure: Final anomaly scores {ˆyi}hi=1 

1: I ← RecurseLocalize (S, 1, h, l min , 0, d max )

2: I ← MergeIntervals (I, δ )

3: C ← SelectTopKIntervals (S, I, K max )

4: for i = 1 to h do 

5: ˆyi ← LocalEvidenceScore (si)

6: end for 

7: return {ˆyi}hi=1 

Algorithm 3 Recursive anomalous window proposal generation 

1: function RecurseLocalize (S, i 0, i 1, l min , d, d max )2: if i0 > i 1 then 

3: return ∅

4: end if 

5: z ← WindowEvidence (S, i 0, i 1)

6: if ¬LikelyAnomalousWindow (z) then 

7: return ∅

8: end if 

9: if d ≥ dmax or (i1 − i0 + 1) ≤ lmin then 

10: return {(i0, i 1)}

11: end if 

12: im ← ⌊ (i0 + i1)/2⌋

13: IL ← RecurseLocalize (S, i 0, i m, l min , d + 1 , d max )

14: IR ← RecurseLocalize (S, i m + 1 , i 1, l min , d + 1 , d max )

15: return MergeIntervals (IL ∪ I R, 1) 

16: end function 

for anomaly scoring only if the summary passes the grounding-based gating criterion. Otherwise, the method falls back to the original segment-level inference without contextual summary input. Algorithm 2 summarizes the overall REA pipeline. Starting from the full temporal window, the algorithm recursively partitions the interval using Re-curseLocalize (detailed in Algorithm 3) and retains windows that satisfy the anomaly evidence criteria. Each candidate window is evaluated using summary statistics of the local evidence scores within the window. The recursion stops once a minimum window length or maximum depth is reached, producing a set of candidate anomalous intervals. The local evidence score for each segment combines the segment-level anomaly prediction with textual signals extracted from the VLM responses, including anomaly cue keyword matches and negation patterns. The resulting score is clipped to the range [0 , 1] .20 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

Anomalous Cue Words and Negation Patterns used in REA y(ev )            

> i
> Cue Keywords (Cue (Ei))
> fight, fighting, assault, attack, hit, punch, kick, stab, shoot, gun, weapon, rob, rob-bery, steal, stealing, theft, burglary, break in, breaking, vandal, vandalism, arson, fire, explosion, explode, crash, collision, acci-dent, chase, chasing, running, panic, scream, blood, knife, climbing over a fence, climb over a fence, trespass, trespassing.
> Negation Patterns (Neg (Ei))
> \b no anomaly\b \b there is no anomaly\b \b no unusual\b \b no (visible )?damage\b \b no (unusual|abnormal) (movement|events)\b
> Cue keywords activate semantic anomaly evidence (weighted by γ), while negation patterns suppress false positives (weighted by δ), as defined in Eq. (2).

Fig. A.1: Fixed anomaly cue words and negation patterns used to compute y(ev )

> i

After recursion, candidate intervals are merged to remove small gaps and up to Kmax intervals are retained based on their accumulated evidence. The final refined anomaly scores {ˆyi}hi=1 are then obtained by assigning each segment its corresponding local evidence score. The threshold values used in the window evidence criteria are fixed across datasets. 

A.1 REA Anomaly Cue Words and Negation Patterns 

To incorporate semantic signals from the VLM-generated explanations, REA utilizes predefined anomaly cue keywords and negation patterns when computing the evidence score y(ev ) 

> i

described in Eq. (2). The cue keywords correspond to terms commonly associated with anomalous activities (e.g., violence, accidents, or suspicious behavior), while the negation patterns capture explicit statements indicating the absence of anomalies. For a given segment explanation Ei, the function Cue (Ei) counts the num-ber of matches to anomaly cue keywords appearing in the explanation text. Conversely, Neg (Ei) counts the number of matches to predefined negation pat-terns that indicate normal behavior or explicitly deny the presence of anomalies. These two signals provide complementary semantic evidence that helps refine the anomaly score produced by the VLM. The keyword sets are designed to be general and dataset-agnostic, and re-main fixed across all datasets used in our experiments. This avoids dataset-specific prompt engineering and ensures consistent evidence aggregation during inference. Figure A.1 lists the anomaly cue keywords and negation patterns used in REA. 

B Additional Results and Analysis 

This section reports additional ablations and hyperparameter analysis that in-formed the final design choices. Unless stated otherwise, the numbers below are LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 21                                              

> Table A.1: Gate threshold sensitivity (AUC) and Summary Stride Length.
> Mean similarity threshold is on the x-axis and normalized entropy threshold on the y-axis. Performance is stable across a broad range (mean ∈[0 .10 ,0.35] , entropy ∈
> [0 .60 ,0.85] ), indicating that gate tuning is not critical. We use (0.30, 0.80) in all experiments.
> Entropy ↓/ Mean →0.10 0.20 0.275 0.30 0.35 0.60 86.50 86.50 86.52 86.52 86.43 0.75 86.38 86.38 86.47 86.64 86.42 0.80 86.61 86.61 86.59 86.68 86.43 0.85 86.63 86.63 86.50 86.66 86.44
> Table A.2: Effect of summary stride length in CEA.
> Summary Stride AUC (%) w/o REA AUC (%) with REA 386.69 87.90 586.68 87.63 786.72 87.83 986.65 87.79

reported on UCF-Crime using the same backbone (InternVL2-8B) and inference protocol as the main paper. 

B.1 CEA Threshold/Hyperparameter Analysis 

We perform a threshold analysis on the thresholds for the thresholds introduced in the summary gating mechanism. Table A.1 shows how the mean similarity threshold and the entropy threshold effect the calculated respective AUC values 

before REA has been applied. Overall, we notice that performance is stable across a large range of thresholds, indicating that gate tuning is not sensitive with respect to threshold setting. We further study the effect of the summary stride parameter S used in CEA. As shown in Table A.2, the method is robust to the choice of stride length, with only minor performance variations across different settings. Interestingly, both smaller and larger stride values can yield slight improvements, suggesting that the contextual summaries provide useful information even when updated less fre-quently. At the same time, larger stride values reduce the frequency of summary updates and therefore decrease the additional computation introduced by CEA while maintaining comparable performance. We use S = 5 in our experiments as a balanced default across datasets and models. 22 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye                 

> Table A.3: Effect of the interval selection parameter kmax in REA. Perfor-mance is stable across a wide range of values, with the best result obtained at kmax = 6 .
> kmax AUC (%) 287.00 487.53 687.63
> 887.49 10 87.28
> Table A.4: AUC (%) of our full pipeline when varying the anomaly keyword/negation configuration used to compute textual evidence in RACA. Configuration AUC (%) No keywords / negation cues 87.36 Our selected keyword and negation set 87.63
> Expanded keyword set 87.34

B.2 REA Threshold/Hyperparameter Analysis 

We analyze the effect of the interval selection parameter kmax used in REA, which controls the maximum number of anomaly intervals retained during dynamic interval selection. The results are reported in Table A.3. Overall, the method shows strong robustness across different values of kmax ,with performance remaining stable within a narrow range of AUC scores. The best performance is achieved at kmax = 6 , which provides a good balance between capturing multiple anomaly intervals and avoiding overly fragmented predictions. Smaller values of kmax may miss secondary anomaly intervals, while exces-sively large values may introduce noisy intervals with weaker evidence. Based on this analysis, we use kmax = 6 as the default setting in all experiments. 

REA Keyword and Negation Sensitivity REA incorporates lightweight textual signals through anomaly keyword matches and explicit negation suppres-sion (Appendix A.1). To verify robustness, we first ablate the keyword design by (i) removing keywords entirely and (ii) expanding the keyword list beyond our selected set. Results in Table A.4 show that the curated keyword set provides the best performance, while overly broad expansions slightly reduce AUC, likely due to spurious cue activations. We further analyze the sensitivity of the weighting coefficients used in Eq. (2) of the main paper. Table A.5 evaluates the anomaly cue coefficient γ and the negation penalty δ. Performance remains highly stable across a broad range of settings, indicating that the REA evidence aggregation mechanism is not sensi-tive to precise coefficient tuning. Moderate negation penalties ( δ ∈ [0 .20 , 0.30] )consistently produce the strongest results, while the cue keyword coefficient γ

has only a minor effect within the tested range. LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 23                                                        

> Table A.5: Cue and negation coefficient anal-ysis. Anomaly cue coefficient γis shown along the x-axis and negation penalty δalong the y-axis.
> δ↓γ→0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.15 87.27 87.27 87.27 87.27 87.27 0.20 87.64 87.53 87.53 87.53 87.53 0.25 87.64 87.63 87.63 87.63 87.52 0.30 87.62 87.62 87.62 87.62 87.62 0.35 87.21 87.17 87.17 87.17 87.17 0.40 87.16 87.07 87.08 87.07 87.03
> Table A.6: Sensitivity of α.
> αcontrols the weight of the segment-level anomaly predic-tion in Eq. (2).
> αAUC (%) 0.80 87.15 0.85 87.63 0.90 87.63
> 0.95 87.55 1.00 87.28
> Table A.7: AUC (%) when using different vision encoders for diverse key frame se-lection in CEA. Vision Encoder AUC (%) Pretrained ResNet-50 87.63 CLIP 87.54

We additionally study the influence of the segment-level anomaly weight α,which balances the original prediction score with textual evidence. As shown in Table A.6, performance peaks for α ∈ [0 .85 , 0.90] and remains stable across nearby values. This indicates that textual evidence provides a useful comple-mentary signal while the original segment-level prediction remains the dominant component. Based on these results, we adopt (α, γ, δ ) = (0 .90 , 0.05 , 0.25) for all experiments. 

B.3 Sensitivity Test on Vision Encoders 

We further evaluate the robustness of the proposed pipeline to the choice of vision encoder used for diverse key frame selection in CEA. In the official im-plementation, we use a pretrained ResNet-50 model to encode representative frames. We also replace this encoder with CLIP features to assess the sensitivity of the method to the visual representation. As shown in Table A.7, the choice of encoder has minimal impact on perfor-mance. Using CLIP features results in only a slight decrease in AUC, indicating that the key frame selection stage is largely insensitive to the specific vision encoder used. 

B.4 Performance Comaprison on Other Metrics 

In addition to AUC, we evaluate our method using mean intersection-over-union (mIoU) to assess temporal localization quality. The results are reported in Ta-ble A.8. Overall, LATERN achieves the highest mIoU among all configurations. 24 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye           

> Table A.8: mIoU (%) of different components of LATERN compared to the baseline VERA. Method mIoU (%)
> Without REA
> Baseline VERA 30.06 Non-gated Summaries 31.91 Gated Summaries (CEA) 28.94
> With REA
> No Summaries + REA 34.04 Non-gated Summaries + REA 35.12 Gated Summaries + REA ( LATERN )35.16

Notably, REA contributes the largest improvement in localization perfor-mance. Applying REA alone increases mIoU from 30.06% to 34.04%, indicat-ing that recursive temporal aggregation effectively refines anomaly boundaries. When combined with CEA, the performance further improves to 35.16%. We also observe that contextual summaries alone do not directly improve mIoU, as gated summaries without REA slightly decrease the score. This is expected since CEA primarily improves contextual reasoning for anomaly de-tection rather than boundary refinement. However, when combined with REA, the contextual signals help identify more coherent anomaly intervals, resulting in the best overall localization performance. 

C LLM-as-a-Judge and Human Evaluation Protocol 

To quantify whether our event-level explanations are more descriptive than segment-level explanations, we evaluate how well an external LLM can recover the ground-truth anomaly category when given only the explanation text (no frames, no scores, no metadata). We implement this “LLM-as-a-judge” protocol using gpt-oss:20b .

Closed-Set Category Space The judge performs closed-set classification over the 13 UCF-Crime anomaly types used in our UCF-Crime experiments: 

["abuse", "arrest", "arson", "assault", "burglary", "explosion", "fighting", "roadaccidents", "robbery", "shoplifting", "shooting", "stealing", "vandalism" ]

Alias normalization. Because natural language explanations may use synony-mous surface forms (e.g., “accident” → roadaccidents , “fight” → fighting ), LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 25 

we map common aliases to the canonical labels using a deterministic lookup table prior to computing accuracy. 

Ground-Truth Category Inference from Video Names UCF-Crime video names encode the anomaly type (e.g., Robbery102_x264 ). We infer the ground-truth category by extracting the leading alphabetic prefix before the first digit (with fallbacks for underscore formatting), then canonicalizing via the alias table. Videos whose names indicate “Normal” content are treated as out-of-scope for this protocol and skipped. 

Explanation Variants Compared For each predicted anomalous cluster, we compare four explanation types: 1. Cluster-Level: the generated cluster explanation. 2. Most Anomalous Segment-Level (Peak): the single segment-level ex-planation inside the cluster with highest local evidence score (Sec. C). 3. Random Segment-Level: a randomly selected segment-level explanation from within the cluster. 4. All Segment-Level Concatenated: concatenation of all segment-level ex-planations within the cluster (optionally including per-segment running sum-maries). All variants are judged independently by the same LLM judge prompt and de-coding. 

Peak Segment Selection (Most Anomalous Segment-Level Baseline) 

To define the “most anomalous” segment-level baseline robustly, we select the peak segment using the soft evidence scores introduced in Eq. (2) in the main paper. 

Judge Prompt Template We prompt the external judge with a strict closed-set instruction and require a single JSON output containing the predicted label. 

Structured output constraint. We enforce JSON-schema constrained decoding with the enum: CANON_CATS ∪ {"unknown"} . Any unparseable response, schema violation, or runtime error triggers up to three retries; after failure, the prediction defaults to unknown .

Decoding Configuration We evaluate with deterministic decoding to ensure stable judge behavior: 

– Judge model: gpt-oss:20b 

– Backend: ollama 

– Temperature: 0.026 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye  

> CATEGORY_JUDGE_PROMPT (verbatim)
> You are a strict evaluator. Task: Given ONLY the text explanation of an event in a video, predict the video anomaly category Closed-set labels (choose exactly ONE): {labels} Rules: - Use ONLY the information explicitly stated in the explanation. - Output must be a single JSON object with one key: "label". Explanation: {explanation} Return ONLY: {"label": "<one of the labels above>"}
> Fig. A.2: Prompt used for explanation-only anomaly category prediction by the ex-ternal LLM judge.

Accuracy Metric For each explanation variant, we compute category recov-ery accuracy :

Acc = 1

N

> N

X

> n=1

Iˆcn = cn

,

where cn is the inferred ground-truth category from the video filename (Sec. C) and ˆcn is the judge prediction after canonicalization. This yields the values re-ported in the reported results. 

C.1 Human Evaluation Protocol 

To assess the quality of the generated explanations, we conduct a human evalu-ation following the procedure described in the main paper. We randomly sample 200 predicted anomalous events from the UCF-Crime dataset and collect the explanations generated by our LATERN as well as 3 comparison segment-level explanations, which are the same as the LLM as a judge evaluation (see Ap-pendix section C). For each event, annotators are shown the representative frames corresponding to the detected anomaly together with the candidate explanations. The evalua-tion is conducted as a pairwise preference task: annotators are asked to select the explanation that better describes the anomalous event while remaining faithful to the visual evidence. Annotators are instructed to prioritize factual consistency with the visual content and the completeness of the anomaly description rather than stylistic LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 27 

aspects of the text. Each comparison is evaluated independently, and the final human preference score is computed as the percentage of times an explanation is selected as the better description. When combined with anomaly category prediction accuracy and average to-ken length, these metrics provide a comprehensive evaluation of explanation usefulness, balancing human preference, semantic accuracy, and descriptive effi-ciency. 

D Computational Complexity Analysis 

We analyze the computational complexity of the proposed Context-Enhanced Analysis (CEA) and Recursive Evidence Aggregation (REA), with particular emphasis on the additional cost of CEA relative to a VERA-style segment-level inference pipeline. 

Notation. Let h denote the number of temporal segments in a video. Let Cvlm de-note the cost of one segment-level VLM inference call, which is the dominant cost in both VERA and CEA. Let Csum denote the cost of one summary-generation call, Chist the cost of encoding one representative history frame, and Cgrd the cost of one grounding step. Let s denote the summary refresh stride (with s = 5 in our implementation), and let M denote the maximum number of stored history snippets (with M = 50 in our implementation). 

VERA-style segment inference. A VERA-style pipeline performs one VLM in-ference per segment and does not maintain historical summaries or grounding statistics. Its total complexity is therefore 

O(h C vlm ).

Analysis on CEA. CEA preserves the same dominant computation as VERA: it still performs exactly one segment-level VLM inference for each of the h seg-ments. Thus, the main computational term remains 

O(h C vlm ).

Compared to VERA, the additional computation in CEA comes only from three lightweight components: 1. History update. For each segment, CEA encodes one representative frame and inserts it into a bounded history buffer, contributing 

O(h C hist ).

2. Periodic summary generation. A history summary is refreshed only once every s segments, rather than at every segment. This contributes 

O

 hs Csum 



.28 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

3. Grounding and gating. At the same refresh steps, CEA computes image-text similarities and entropy-based grounding statistics over a bounded set of history key frames, contributing 

O

 hs Cgrd 



.

Hence, the total complexity of CEA is 

O



h C vlm + h C hist + hs Csum + hs Cgrd 



.

Importantly, this additional overhead is modest in practice. Unlike the main anomaly scoring step, which invokes the full VLM on every segment, summary generation and grounding are performed only periodically, and both operate on bounded history size and a small number of selected key frames. As a result, CEA does not alter the dominant linear scaling of VERA with respect to the number of segments. Instead, it adds only a small constant-factor overhead while providing temporally grounded contextual reasoning. Equivalently, relative to VERA, the extra compute introduced by CEA is 

O



h C hist + hs Csum + hs Cgrd 



,

which is practically minor because s is fixed, the history size is capped, and the dominant cost remains the per-segment VLM inference. Therefore, both VERA and CEA scale linearly with video length, but CEA achieves context-aware reasoning with only minimal additional computation. 

Analysis on REA. REA is a lightweight post-processing step applied after segment-level predictions are obtained. Let h again denote the number of temporal seg-ments. The recursive binary partitioning evaluates temporal windows and splits only those that satisfy the anomaly evidence criterion. Since the recursion depth is bounded by O(log h) and the windows at each depth partition the tempo-ral axis, the total amount of processing is O(h log h) in the worst case. Interval merging and top-K interval selection add at most linearithmic overhead in the number of candidate intervals, which is upper bounded by h. Therefore, the overall worst-case complexity of REA is 

O(h log h).

In practice, the computational cost of REA is negligible compared to the VLM inference cost in CEA or VERA, since REA operates only on segment-level scores and short textual responses and does not invoke an additional large vision-language model. LATERN : Test-Time Context-Aware Explainable Video Anomaly Detection 29 

Event-level explanation generation. After REA produces cleaned segment-level anomaly scores, we optionally generate event-level explanations by first finding the identified anomaly events and then invoking the VLM once per detected event. Let c denote the number of anomaly events in a video. In practice, c

is small (typically around 2 per video), since anomalous events are sparse and temporally localized. For each anomaly-event, the explanation module selects a bounded num-ber of informative segments, extracts a fixed number of representative frames, and constructs a single prompt for event-level description. Since the number of selected segments, sampled frames, and generated tokens are all capped by fixed constants in our implementation, the cost per anomaly-event is bounded by a constant Cevt . The total complexity of event-level explanation generation is therefore 

O(c C evt ).

Because c ≪ h in practice is typically very small, this cost is negligible compared to the segment-level VLM inference cost of CEA or VERA, both of which scale with the full number of temporal segments. Therefore, event-level explanation generation introduces only minimal additional computation while providing compact natural-language descriptions of the detected anomaly events. 

E Discussion of Limitations and Potential Societal Impact 

Limitations. Despite its effectiveness in enabling structured temporal reasoning for VAD, the proposed framework has certain limitations that open avenues for future improvement. First, the method relies on the reasoning capabilities of large vision-language models (VLMs), whose outputs may occasionally contain hallucinations despite the grounding and evidence aggregation mechanisms used in CEA and REA. Second, the anomaly cue keywords and negation patterns used in REA are manually specified and may not cover all possible anomaly descrip-tions across diverse domains. Finally, the system inherits the computational cost of VLM inference, which may limit real-time deployment in resource-constrained environments. 

Potential societal impact. Video anomaly detection systems are increasingly de-ployed in surveillance, security, and public safety contexts. By improving long-range temporal reasoning and producing more coherent event-level interpreta-tions, our framework enhances the reliability and explainability of automated monitoring systems. Such improvements can assist human operators in identify-ing dangerous events more accurately, reducing fragmented alarms, and improv-ing situational awareness in complex environments. At the same time, video anomaly detection is inherently imperfect. Errors such as false alarms or missed detections cannot be fully eliminated and may have operational consequences in safety-critical scenarios. Importantly, our method is designed as a decision-support tool rather than a fully autonomous system in the 30 Mitchell Piehl and Muchao Ye 

real world, and it still requires human oversight for verification and final judg-ment. Responsible deployment should therefore ensure appropriate governance, transparency, and adherence to privacy regulations, with humans remaining in the loop for critical decisions.