Title: Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04591v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 01:14:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
Submitted to International Journal of Computer Vision, December 2025 

# Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 

Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ · Zhiqiang Yuan 1⋆§ · Chongyang Li 1,2 · Qiwei Yan 1,2 · Zexi Jia 1 ·

Jiapei Zhang 1 · Xiaoyue Duan 1 · Yingchao Feng 2 · Jinchao Zhang 1† · Jie Zhou 1

> Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract With the widespread adoption of multi-modal com-munication platforms, long-form dialogues that interleave text and images have become increasingly common. In real-world applications such as customer support, knowledge management, and collaborative tools, users often seek to revisit coherent dialogue fragments related to specific topics or events, rather than isolated utterances or images. To ad-dress this need, we propose the task of Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval (FFR), which requires a model to locate semanti-cally relevant fragments composed of multiple utterances and images within multi-modal long-form dialogues. We ex-plore two core FFR settings: (1) FFR within Single-Dialogue, where the model retrieves fragments from a given long-form dialogue; and (2) FFR within Dialogue Corpus, which in-volves retrieving relevant fragments from a large-scale dia-logue corpus, reflecting practical open-domain retrieval sce-narios. To support the former, we introduce F 2RVLM, a generation-based retrieval model trained with reinforcement learning, which incorporates multi-objective rewards and difficulty-aware curriculum sampling to enhance the consis-tency and coherence of retrieved fragments. For the latter, we develop FFRS, a two-stage retrieval system that com-bines offline fragment-level indexing with online retrieval, enabling efficient and accurate retrieval at scale. Specifically, each long-form dialogue is decomposed into minimal seman-tic units (i.e., fragments), which are encoded into a vector database by a Fragment Embedding Model (FEM). During inference, FEM rapidly recalls Top-K candidate fragments    

> Zhiqiang Yuan (yuanzhiqiang19@mails.ucas.edu.cn) 1. Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China 2. Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
> ⋆These authors contributed equally.
> §Tech Lead.
> †Corresponding authors.

based on a user query, followed by F 2RVLM performing fine-grained reasoning to identify the most relevant sub-content within each candidate. To support and evaluate FFR, we construct MLDR, the longest multi-modal dialogue re-trieval dataset to date, along with a real-world test set based on WeChat conversations. Extensive experiments on both benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed F 2RVLM and FFRS consistently achieve superior performance in both single-dialogue and corpus-level FFR settings. The code and datasets are publicly available at FFRS.github.io. 

Keywords Retrieval · Multi-modal Dialogue · Vision-language Model 

1 Introduction 

With the widespread adoption of multi-modal communication platforms such as intelligent customer service systems (Nie et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2024b), social messaging applica-tions (Tomar and Kakkar, 2014; Walnycky et al., 2015), and enterprise-level assistants (Bischoff and Graefe, 2002), mas-sive amounts of dialogue data interwoven with text and im-ages are rapidly accumulating. Efficiently retrieving semanti-cally relevant information from such large-scale multi-modal corpora has become a core capability for enabling knowl-edge discovery, optimizing user experience, and advancing intelligent human-computer interaction (Lin et al., 2025). Compared to traditional text-only dialogues, multi-modal long-form conversations often span dozens or even hundreds of turns, exhibiting strong temporal dependencies, intricate cross-modal semantic interactions, and complex contextual relationships (Chen et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2025b). These characteristics make retrieving useful information from them far more challenging than from short texts or structured in-puts (i.e., documents).           

> arXiv:2606.04591v1 [cs.CL] 3 Jun 2026 2Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆et al.
> Fig. 1 Comparison of Multi-modal Dialogue Retrieval Paradigms. (a) Response Selection: Selecting the most appropriate utterance or image from a predefined candidate pool as a response to the given dialogue history. (b) Single-item Retrieval: Retrieving one utterance or image directly from the original multi-modal dialogue context. We introduce the task of Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval (FFR) , which aims to retrieve semantically coherent multi-turn fragments containing both utterances and images, better reflecting real-world information needs in long-form multi-modal conversations. (c) FFR within Single-dialogue: Given a user query and a multi-modal dialogue, retrieve a single semantically relevant fragment composed of multiple interleaved utterances and images from the same dialogue. (d) FFR within Dialogue Corpus: Given a user query and a large-scale corpus of dialogues, retrieve multiple relevant fragments from different dialogues, enabling global-level retrieval across conversations and broader content coverage.

Current paradigms for multi-modal dialogue retrieval gen-erally fall into two categories: (a) selecting the most relevant single utterance or image from a pre-defined candidate set as the dialogue response (see Fig.1.a) (Yin et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2025b), and (b) directly retrieving an individual utterance or image from the original dialogue context (see Fig.1.b) (Zang et al., 2021). While effective in response prediction and short-context scenarios, existing paradigms struggle in real-world applications. In practice, users rarely aim to retrieve isolated pieces of information; instead, they tend to seek coherent semantic fragments that span multiple dialogue turns and modalities, typically associated with specific topics or events. Examples include requests like “the conversation about the product launch plan from last week” or “the portion involving a particular design image.” These fine-grained information needs underscore a critical gap between existing retrieval paradigms and users’ expectations in navigating complex, long-form multi-modal dialogues. To fill this gap, we introduce the task of Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval (FFR) , as illustrated in Fig.1.c-d. In contrast to existing paradigms that focus on retrieving single utterances or isolated images, FFR aims to locate seman-tically relevant and contextually complete fragments in re-sponse to user queries, which typically consist of interleaved text and image turns. By enabling FFR, we seek to transform long-form dialogue content into semantic units that better align with human understanding, thereby significantly im-proving the efficiency and accuracy of retrieving valuable information from large-scale multi-modal corpora. As a foundation for studying FFR, we construct MLDR, a large-scale multi-modal long-form dialogue retrieval dataset, where each dialogue covers three distinct topics with an aver-age of 25.45 turns, making it the longest-turn multi-modal dataset to date. To further evaluate generalization in realis-tic settings, we curate a WeChat-based test set consisting of real-world dialogues with an average of 75.38 turns. To-gether, these datasets support both controlled benchmarking and open-domain evaluation for fragment retrieval. Based on these resources, we systematically explore FFR under two representative settings: FFR within Single-dialogue , which evaluates fine-grained fragment retrieval within a single conversation, and FFR within Dialogue Cor-pus , which reflects large-scale retrieval across multiple dia-logues. This dual-setting design not only supports thorough assessment of local and global retrieval performance but also demonstrates strong potential for real-world deployment. Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 3

(1) FFR within Single-dialogue. To develop a retrieval model capable of efficiently performing FFR in multi-modal long-form dialogues, we first explore fragment retrieval within a single dialogue, where the model is expected to locate the most relevant fragment given a user query. To this end, we assess representative vision-language mod-els (VLMs), including embedding models (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023) and multi-modal language models (MLLMs) (Jaech et al., 2024; Comanici et al., 2025), utilizing our constructed datasets. Results reveal that while embedding models offer faster inference, they fall short in semantic pre-cision. Surprisingly, even leading MLLMs, such as Qwen2.5-VL-72B (Wang et al., 2024b) and Doubao-Seed-1.6 (Guo et al., 2025a), frequently retrieve incoherent utterance-image pairs, e.g., mismatched turns or irrelevant visual content, re-sulting in suboptimal F1 scores in realistic settings. This limitation primarily stems from the gap between the models’ learning objectives and the demands of fragment retrieval: while optimized for generating responses from visual-textual inputs, these models lack explicit supervision to ensure that the retrieved or generated fragments are semantically coher-ent and contextually aligned with the user query. Thus, we introduce F2RVLM , an MLLM-based retrieval model tailored for FFR. F 2RVLM follows a two-stage train-ing paradigm: supervised fine-tuning to inject fragment-level retrieval knowledge, followed by GRPO-based reinforcement learning to align retrieval behaviors with human preferences. We design a multi-objective reward scheme that encourages the generation of fragments with semantic precision and contextual coherence: (i) an F1-based alignment reward en-courages accurate matching with ground-truth fragments, penalizing over- and under-retrieval; (ii) a fragment order consistency enhances semantic alignment between selected utterances and images, guiding the model to organize con-tent in a coherent, human-preferred manner. Additionally, we incorporate a difficulty-aware curriculum sampling strat-egy that ranks training samples from easy to hard based on retrieval F1 and prediction entropy, enabling progressive learning of reasoning capabilities in complex, multi-turn con-versations. Extensive experiments on both the in-domain MLDR and real-domain WeChat-based sets demonstrate that F2RVLM significantly outperforms mainstream VLMs in retrieval accuracy and contextual understanding. 

(2) FFR within Dialogue Corpus. While F 2RVLM demon-strates strong performance in single-dialogue settings, real-world applications often require matching queries against thousands of dialogues. To address this, we further develop 

FFRS, a two-stage Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval System, that balances semantic precision and retrieval efficiency through an “offline structured indexing and online dual-stage retrieval” paradigm, as illustrated in Fig.1.d. 1. Offline Indexing . We first decompose each dialogue into minimal semantic units, referred to as fragments. Each fragment is then encoded and stored in a vector database, forming an offline-constructed index that sup-ports fast similarity-based retrieval without the need to re-parse the entire dialogue corpus during inference. To ensure high -quality embeddings, we introduce a Frag-ment Embedding Model (FEM) trained with a dual-level contrastive learning strategy: (i) at the inter-fragment level, FEM captures global semantic consistency across dialogues; and (ii) at the intra-fragment level, it models fine-grained pragmatic dependencies through multiple Question-Answer (QA) style subtasks constructed within each fragment. This design allows FEM to preserve the semantic integrity of fragment embeddings, thereby sup-porting accurate and context-aware retrieval. 2. Online Retrieval . In response to a user query, the system first conducts fast embedding-based retrieval to coarsely recall the Top-K candidate fragments from the offline-constructed index. These candidates are then further re-fined by F 2RVLM, which conducts more precise reason-ing to locate sub-content that better matches the query semantics. By combining embedding-driven coarse recall with generation-driven fine-grained reasoning, FFRS strikes a fa-vorable trade-off between retrieval efficiency and semantic precision. It provides a robust and adaptable framework for fine-grained retrieval across both individual dialogues and large-scale corpora, paving the way for practical deployment of retrieval-oriented multi-modal dialogue systems. Experi-ments on a real-world WeChat-based corpus further demon-strate that our system achieves efficient and accurate frag-ment retrieval, highlighting its effectiveness under realistic dialogue scenarios. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

– Novel Retrieval Task. We introduce Fine-grained Frag-ment Retrieval (FFR), a novel retrieval task that aims to directly locate semantically coherent utterance-image fragments from long-form dialogues, differing from tradi-tional dialogue retrieval that selects the most appropriate individual elements. 

– FFR Dataset Construction. We construct MLDR, the longest-turn multi-modal dialogue retrieval dataset to date, averaging 25.45 turns per dialogue, with each cov-ering three distinct topics. Additionally, we curate a real-world WeChat-based test set averaging 75.38 turns per dialogue to evaluate retrieval generalization in practice. 

– FFR within Single-Dialogue. We propose F 2RVLM, a reinforcement learning-based retrieval model tailored for single-dialogue FFR. It incorporates multi-objective rewards and difficulty-aware curriculum sampling to pro-gressively enhance the semantic consistency and coher-ence of retrieved fragments. Experiments on MLDR and WeChat test sets demonstrate that F 2RVLM consistently outperforms popular VLMs in retrieval accuracy. 4 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

– FFR within Dialogue Corpus. To scale FFR to a large dialogue corpus, we develop FFRS, a two-stage system that combines embedding-based coarse recall with fine-grained reasoning. Evaluations on real-world WeChat dialogues validate its capability for fast and semantically aligned fragment retrieval in realistic settings. Compared to our original conference paper accepted by AAAI (Bi et al., 2025), which introduced the F 2RVLM model for single-dialogue fragment retrieval, this extended work presents four major improvements: (i) We expand the task scope from single -dialogue to corpus -level fragment re-trieval , enabling the model to identify semantically consis-tent fragments across multiple dialogues, an essential step to-ward scalable real - world applications; (ii) We develop FFRS, a two-stage retrieval system that follows the “offline in-dexing + online retrieval” paradigm, combining embedding-based coarse recall with fine-grained reasoning, thereby over-coming the inefficiency of prior generation-based methods that rely on exhaustive per-dialogue inference; (iii) To sup-port FFRS, we introduce a Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) that encodes fine-grained multimodal dialogue frag-ments into dense representations, enabling efficient fragment-level indexing and fast coarse retrieval across large corpora; 

(iv) We integrate F 2RVLM into FFRS as the fine-grained reasoning module , forming a unified framework that sup-ports both intra- and inter-dialogue retrieval, thereby enhanc-ing its applicability to multimodal personal assistants and knowledge-centric retrieval systems. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Multi-modal Dialogue Datasets Recent advances in vision-language modeling have acceler-ated progress in multi-modal dialogue understanding (Meng et al., 2020). Existing dialogue datasets fall into two main types: (1) Image-grounded datasets (Mostafazadeh et al., 2017; Shuster et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023) consist of dialogues explicitly constructed around a given im-age, often collected via crowdsourcing. While well-aligned, they lack the natural heterogeneity of real conversations, where not all utterances refer to images. (2) Image-sharing datasets (Zang et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024) address this by capturing more spontaneous visual usage. For instance, MMDialog (Feng et al., 2023) collects over 1M social media conversations with images dispersed across turns, while DialogCC (Lee et al., 2024) enriches textual dialogues by inserting suitable images. How-ever, these corpora still consist mostly of short, single-topic dialogues and lack the long-range, multi-topic structure of real-world interactions. To address this gap, we construct a novel large-scale dataset designed to capture multi-topic transitions and long-range dependencies in multi-modal di-alogues, thereby providing a more realistic and challenging testbed for fine-grained retrieval and contextual understand-ing. 2.2 Vision Language Models for Retrieval Vision-language models (VLMs) have made substantial progress in cross-modal alignment, especially in image-text retrieval. Current research can be broadly categorized into three paradigms: dual-encoder embedding models, multi-modal large language models (MLLMs), and LLM-based embedding models. 

Dual-Encoder Embedding Models. These models adopt separate encoders for visual and textual inputs and learn a joint embedding space to support scalable similarity-based retrieval. Representative models include CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), trained on 400M image-text pairs via contrastive learn-ing, and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), which scales to 1.8B noisy pairs to improve multilingual generalization. Exten-sions such as UniIR (Wei et al., 2024) and UniVL-DR (Liu et al., 2022) adapt this framework to various retrieval tasks. However, these models are primarily optimized for short, context-independent queries. When applied to semantically rich and long-form multi-modal scenarios, such as dialogue-level retrieval, they often struggle to preserve coherence and context alignment. 

Multi-modal LLMs. MLLMs (Liu et al., 2023a; Achiam et al., 2023) extend large language models (LLMs) with vi-sual encoders, enabling them to process multi-modal inputs and generate context-aware responses. Recent works (Wang et al., 2024b; Jaech et al., 2024; Comanici et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2024b) demonstrate strong perfor-mance in tasks that require reasoning across modalities and dialogue history. These models are especially suitable for complex settings involving long-form conversations, user-specific intents, and implicit cross-turn semantics. Their gen-erative nature enables fine-grained, query-driven interpreta-tion, but also poses challenges in inference latency during large-scale retrieval. 

LLM-based Embedding Models. A recent trend explores using large language models (LLMs) to directly generate embeddings for retrieval tasks. In the text retrieval domain, studies (Su et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a; Meng et al., 2024; BehnamGhader et al., 2024) have shown that combining in-struction tuning with LLMs enables unified representations for text and document retrieval. These models typically pro-cess user input through LLMs and extract the hidden states from the final Transformer layer, using either mean pooling or selecting the last token as the final embedding. Inspired by these advances, researchers have extended this approach to the multi-modal setting. Specifically, recent works (Meng et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024b; Liu et al., Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 5

2025a) leverage MLLMs to produce unified representations across different input modalities. For example, VLM2Vec-v2 (Meng et al., 2025) supports embedding generation for text, image, video, and document inputs in a unified man-ner, while GME (Zhang et al., 2024) enables retrieval across unimodal, cross-modal, and hybrid-modal scenarios. This work adopts a two-stage retrieval framework to ad-dress fine-grained fragment retrieval in large-scale dialogue corpora. Specifically, LLM-based embedding model are uti-lized for fast coarse retrieval, followed by MLLM-based query-guided reasoning to precisely locate relevant content. 2.3 MLLMs with Reinforcement Learning Recent advances such as OpenAI’s o1 (Jaech et al., 2024) and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025b) have shifted the focus of large language models (LLMs) toward enhancing reason-ing capabilities through reinforcement learning (RL), giving rise to novel RL paradigms like GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), DAPO (Yu et al., 2025), and VAPO (Yue et al., 2025). This trend is rapidly extending to the Multi-modal domain (Shen et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025). LMM-R1 (Peng et al., 2025) proposes a rule-based two-stage RL framework to en-hance multi-modal reasoning. Reason-RFT (Tan et al., 2025) leverages supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and chain-of-thought (CoT) data to initialize the RL process. Vision-R1 (Huang et al., 2025) adopts progressive reflection suppression dur-ing GRPO training to mitigate overthinking after cold starts. Visual-RFT (Liu et al., 2025b) combines GRPO with ver-ifiable reward design to improve visual reasoning, while Video-R1 (Feng et al., 2025) further extends this line by introducing T-GRPO to enhance temporal understanding in video-language tasks. In this work, we extend the application of RL to multi-modal dialogue content retrieval, aiming to improve fine-grained reasoning and fragment localization over long-form image-text contexts. 

3 Task Definition FFR within Single-Dialogue. Fine-grained fragment re-trieval (FFR) can be formulated as a structured prediction task over long-form, multi-turn dialogues that include both textual utterances and images. Given a multi-modal dialogue 

D = {(u1, m 1), (u2, m 2), . . . , (uT , m T )}, where each turn 

t consists of a speaker ut and a message mt that may con-tain text or images, and a user-issued query q, the objective is to retrieve a subset of utterance and image IDs that are semantically relevant to the query. To enable the VLMs to perceive and understand the semantic and temporal structure of each turn, explicit structural markers are inserted into the dialogue: <|utt id start|> ... <|utt id end|> 

to mark each utterance with a unique ID, while 

<|img id start|> ... <|img id end|> marks each em-bedded image. The retrieval process can be formalized as: 

ˆY = F(D, q ) = ( ˆIutt , ˆIimg ) (1) where ˆIutt and ˆIimg denote the predicted sets of relevant utter-ance and image IDs, respectively. 

FFR within Dialogue Corpus. In the corpus-level setting, FFR aims to identify all fragments across a large-scale multi-dialogue collection that are semantically relevant to a user-issued query. Formally, given a query q and a corpus of long-form multi-modal dialogues D = {D1, D 2, . . . , D N },where each dialogue Di = {(ui

> 1

, m i

> 1

), . . . , (uiTi , m iTi )} con-sists of turns with speaker uit and message mit (which may contain text and/or images), the goal is to retrieve a set of fragment-level identifiers that are semantically aligned with 

q, regardless of their source dialogue. The task can be for-malized as: 

ˆY = F(D, q ) = 

n

( ˆdj , ˆtj ) | j = 1 , . . . , M 

o

(2) where each prediction ( ˆdj , ˆtj ) denotes the dialogue ID and turn ID of the j-th retrieved fragment, and M is the total number of predicted relevant fragments. Unlike single-dialogue retrieval, which focuses on local reasoning within a given context, the corpus-level task re-quires global fragment-level matching across heterogeneous dialogues. This setting presents greater challenges in scalabil-ity, semantic sparsity, and noise robustness, as relevant frag-ments may be sparsely distributed across distant dialogues with diverse styles and topics. 

4 Multi-modal Long-form Dialogue Dataset 

To support research on the FFR task, this work constructs a large-scale multi-modal long-form dialogue retrieval dataset, MLDR, along with a real-world test set based on WeChat conversations. This section outlines the construction process and statistical analysis of both MLDR and WeChat test set. 4.1 MLDR Construction As highlighted in Table 1, existing multi-modal dialogue datasets primarily consist of short, single-topic conversations, limiting their utility in modeling the multi-topic nature of real-world dialogues. To fill this gap, we construct a multi-modal long-form dialogue corpus and further develop the MLDR dataset. The pipeline is illustrated in Fig.2 and summarized below (see Appendix.B.1 for details): 

Short Dialogue Collection & Cleaning. We begin with the DialogCC dataset (Lee et al., 2024), which contains high-quality short dialogues sourced from various online plat-forms, covering a wide range of topics such as daily life 6 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Fig. 2 Overview of the MLDR Construction Pipeline. It begins with the collection of multi-modal short dialogues, followed by dialogue cleaning, semantic matching, and triplet construction. Long-form dialogue generation is then performed utilizing Qwen3, followed by multi-granularity annotation for semantic tagging. Finally, diverse query types are sampled to formulate the fine-grained retrieval task. 

and Wikipedia-style discussions. These dialogues provide semantically diverse and realistic foundations for generating coherent long-form conversations. To ensure data quality, we apply a multi-criteria cleaning pipeline to remove sam-ples with poor image-text alignment, topic drift, unstructured turns, or low image quality. 

Dialogue Triplet Semantic Matching. To construct coher-ent long-form dialogues, we design a triplet-based matching strategy that ensures topic continuity and multi-modal align-ment. For each short dialogue DA, we first identify the Top-K semantically similar candidates using BERT-based sentence embeddings. We then refine this set by computing a weighted multi-modal similarity score with CLIP (0.7 for text, 0.3 for image), and select the Top-2 most aligned dialogues DB .This process is repeated for each DB to retrieve two addi-tional candidates DC , forming four unique triplets of the form DA → DB → DC , which serve as structural units for long-form synthesis. 

DA → DiB → Di,j C , i = 1 , 2; j = 1 , 2 (3) These triplets provide a structural foundation for gener-ating extended dialogues. Notably, each dialogue DA, DB ,and DC in a triplet must be mutually disjoint in terms of both dialogue ID and image content, ensuring that each triplet represents unique and non-duplicate information. 

Long-form Dialogue Generation. Each matched triplet is converted into a coherent long-form dialogue utilizing the Qwen3-235B (Yang et al., 2025a) model with structured 

Table 1 Summary of main multi-modal dialogue datasets.                            

> Language Datasets Avg. Turn Avg. Topic
> ENG ImageChat (Shuster et al., 2020) 1.98 1.00 OpenViDial (Meng et al., 2020) 1.00 1.00 PhotoChat (Zang et al., 2021) 12.74 1.00 MMDD (Lee et al., 2021) 11.56 1.00 MMDialog (Feng et al., 2023) 4.56 1.00 DialogCC (Lee et al., 2024) 8.20 1.00 CN MMChat (Zheng et al., 2022) 2.59 1.00 M3ED (Zhao et al., 2022) 9.17 1.00 CPED (Chen et al., 2022) 11.08 1.00 CMMA (Zhang et al., 2023) 7.27 1.00 TikTalk (Lin et al., 2023) 2.25 1.00
> MLDR (Ours) 25.45 3.00

prompts. The generation process preserves multimodal se-mantics, ensures topical coherence through smooth transi-tions, and yields fluent, contextually grounded long-form dialogues, forming high-quality samples for downstream re-trieval and reasoning tasks. 

Multi-Granularity Annotation. To support fine-grained fragment retrieval, we adopt a two-level shared tagging scheme automatically generated by the Qwen3 under struc-tured prompts. Each sentence and image caption is assigned a coarse-grained tag (e.g., domain) and a fine-grained tag (e.g., event), with each tag shared by at least two elements to form semantically consistent fragments. The tagging pro-cess is guided by explicit alignment rules, enabling efficient semantic disentanglement across multimodal dialogues Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 7

Task Construction for Retrieval. We formulate a unified retrieval task over annotated long-form dialogues, where sampled coarse- or fine-grained tags serve as natural lan-guage queries, and corresponding utterances/images sharing the same tag form the retrieval fragments. To enhance di-versity and robustness, we adopt a query-driven sampling strategy that generates four types of query-fragment pairs: (i) multimodal fragments; (ii) utterance-only fragments; (iii) image-only fragments; and (iv) negative samples constructed by replacing queries with unrelated tags. This formulation supports generalization across varied retrieval scenarios. 4.2 Real-domain Evaluation on WeChat Dialogues To evaluate fine-grained retrieval in real-world scenarios, we construct a real-domain test set from naturally occurring multi-modal WeChat conversations. Unlike the synthesized MLDR data, these dialogues reflect authentic user interac-tions, with noisy inputs, informal expressions, and frequent topic shifts, posing greater challenges for robust retrieval. We collect multi-turn image-utterance chats from 12 vol-unteers 1 and preprocess them by removing emojis, sensitive content, profanity, and semantically void utterances. Con-secutive messages from the same speaker are merged, and only dialogues with at least two images are retained. This yields 270 long-form dialogues (avg. 145.38 turns), which are segmented if exceeding 100 turns, resulting in 580 coher-ent samples. All dialogues are manually annotated by a pro-fessionally trained team 2, producing 1,250 query-dialogue pairs. Each sample includes a natural language query, its multi-modal dialogue (avg. 75.38 turns), and ground-truth utterance and image IDs as retrieval targets. The task format remains consistent with MLDR, enabling direct evaluation of model generalization in open-domain fragment retrieval. 4.3 Dataset Statistics and Analysis To better understand the characteristics of the MLDR dataset and its real-world generalization benchmark, we analyze topic coverage and turn-length distribution (more details are provided in Appendix.B.3). 

Topic Diversity. Fig.3.a illustrates the dialogue topic distri-butions across six high-level domains and 14 fine-grained    

> 1Volunteers manually provided their own chat records from the appli-cation. We emphasize that all data were solely provided by volunteers, and no chat records were, or will ever be, obtained from WeChat’s backend. More details are provided in Appendix.B.2.
> 2All dialogues were annotated by 10 trained annotators following standardized guidelines on task definitions and labeling rules. Each dialogue was independently labeled and iteratively verified through multi-round consistency checks, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of the final benchmark.
> Fig. 3 Comparison between the MLDR and WeChat-based datasets in terms of dialogue topic and turn distributions.

subtopics. Both MLDR and WeChat-based test sets demon-strate broad topical coverage, including daily life, work and technology, health and emotion, consumption, mobility and travel, and more. This diversity ensures that the dataset cap-tures a wide range of user intents and real-world scenarios, providing a solid foundation for evaluating fragment-level retrieval in open-domain dialogues. 

Dialogue Turn Distribution. As illustrated in Fig.3.b, the MLDR and WeChat test sets exhibit distinctly different turn distributions. MLDR dialogues are tightly clustered around 15–25 turns, peaking near 20, which stems from its synthetic construction via controlled triplet concatenation. This design ensures topic continuity and manageable length, supporting stable training and evaluation. In contrast, WeChat dialogues display a broad, skewed distribution with many exceeding 60 turns and some approaching 100, reflecting the organic na-ture of real-world conversations—informal, multi-topic, and structurally irregular. This inherent complexity poses greater challenges for fragment retrieval, particularly in aligning sparse, semantically relevant content with user queries. 

5 Methodology 

This section introduces our proposed method for FFR from multi-modal long-form dialogues. We first introduce F2RVLM, an MLLM-based retriever tailored for single-dialogue FFR. F 2RVLM is trained utilizing supervised learn-ing and reinforcement learning to ensure that the retrieved fragments are both semantically precise and contextually co-herent. Next, we describe FFRS, a retrieval system designed 8 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al.  

> Fig. 4 Overview of the F 2RVLM framework for Multi-modal Long-form Dialogue Fragment Retrieval. It consists of supervised fine-tuning for fragment-level knowledge injection, personalized curriculum sampling based on retrieval difficulty, and GRPO-based reinforcement learning to jointly enhance retrieval accuracy and fragment semantic coherence.

for corpus-level FFR across large-scale dialogues. FFRS adopts an offline indexing and online dual-stage retrieval paradigm, combining embedding-based coarse-grained re-call with fine-grained reasoning supported by F 2RVLM. This dual-stage framework enables accurate and efficient retrieval in real-world, corpus-level settings. 5.1 F 2RVLM: Fragment Retriever for Single-dialogue FFR 

5.1.1 Framework Overview 

As illustrated in Fig.4, given a long-form dialogue D and a query q, F 2RVLM generates structured outputs of rele-vant utterance and image IDs. To enable this behavior, the model is trained in two stages: first, supervised fine-tuning injects task-specific knowledge for fragment retrieval; then, GRPO-based reinforcement fine-tuning is conducted with a multi-objective reward that promotes semantic precision and contextual coherence. To stabilize training and enhance long-range reasoning, samples are organized into a difficulty-aware curriculum based on predicted F1 and uncertainty. 

5.1.2 Optimize Fragment Semantic Coherence by GRPO 

We adopt a rule-based variant of Group-Relative Policy Opti-mization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) to align model behavior with human-preferred retrieval patterns. To this end, we de-sign three verifiable reward functions targeting format com-pliance, retrieval accuracy, and fragment order consistency, jointly guiding the model to generate structured, precise, and contextually coherent outputs. 

Preliminary of Group-Relative Policy Optimization . Un-like prior methods (Schulman et al., 2017) that rely on an additional critic model to estimate absolute rewards, GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) directly compares a group of can-didate responses to estimate their relative quality, thereby significantly reducing computational costs. Given an input question Q, the model samples a group of G candidate re-sponses o = {o1, o 2, ..., o G} from the policy model πθold .Each candidate is assessed by a rule-based and verifiable re-ward function R(oi), producing scores r1, r 2, . . . , r G. GRPO then computes group-wise mean and standard deviation to derive the relative advantage of each response: 

Ai = ri − mean ( {r1, r 2, ..., r G})std ( {r1, r 2, ..., r G}) (4) where Ai denotes the relative quality of the i-th response within the group. GRPO encourages the policy model to prefer responses with higher advantages. To prevent the opti-mized policy πθ from deviating excessively from the original model πref , a KL-divergence term DKL (·|· ) is incorporated as a regularization constraint in the training objective. 

Format Reward (RFormat ). RFormat encourages the model to strictly adhere to the expected output format: Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 9

– <|utt ids start|>[...]<|utt ids end|> ;

– <|img ids start|>[...]<|img ids end|> 

This binary reward returns 1 only when the output fully matches the required format. A uniqueness constraint is also enforced: if any duplicate IDs are present, the reward is set to 0, even if the overall format appears correct. 

Retrieval F1 Reward (RF1 ). To encourage precise yet well-scoped retrieval, we design a reward function based on the F1 score with an exponential penalty on length deviation. It considers both utterance and image ID overlaps between predictions and ground truth, while explicitly penalizing over-and under-retrieval: 

RF1 = X

> m∈{ utt ,img }

λm · F1( Ipred  

> m

, I gt 

> m

) · γ| | Ipred   

> m|−| Igt
> m| |

(5) where Ipred * and Igt * denote the predicted and ground-truth ID sets, respectively. The weighting factors λ balances modality importance. The penalty base γ ∈ (0 , 1) modulates the sever-ity of the length penalty, which increases exponentially with deviation in prediction length. 

Fragment Order Consistency (RFragment ). To encourage se-mantically coherent, contextually aligned fragment retrieval, we propose a reward based on cross-modal fragment order consistency. It evaluates whether the retrieved utterances and images maintain the natural progression of information, which is especially important in long conversations with in-tertwined modalities. Given the predicted sets of utterance and image IDs, we first locate the corresponding textual and visual elements in the original dialogue and encode them into a unified embedding space with CLIP. These embeddings are then interleaved and temporally ordered according to their original positions within the dialogue, forming a cross-modal sequence {e1, e 2, ..., e N }. The reward is defined as the aver-age pairwise cosine similarity between adjacent embeddings in this sequence: 

RFragment = 1

N − 1 

> N−1

X

> i=1

cos( ei, ei+1 ) (6) If the sequence length N is less than 2, a fallback reward (i.e., 0.5) is returned. 

5.1.3 Difficulty-aware Curriculum Sampling 

Fragment structures in long-form dialogues vary significantly in the distribution of their internal elements: some fragments are tightly clustered within adjacent turns, while others span sparsely across distant positions. This structural variation substantially affects retrieval difficulty, clustered fragments are generally easier to localize, whereas dispersed ones pose greater challenges for alignment and consistency. To quantify this variability, we introduce a normalized span metric de-fined as: max( turn id )−min( turn id ) 

> L

, where L is the total number of turns in the dialogue. This metric captures how widely a relevant fragment is distributed relative to the overall di-alogue length. Empirical statistics computed over our an-notated benchmark reveal a wide range of dispersion: the normalized span values range from 0.5 to 13.43, with a mean of 1.08 and a standard deviation of 2.36. These results high-light the need for retrieval models to handle both tightly localized and sparsely distributed fragments under a unified framework. To leverage this inherent difficulty hierarchy, we adopt a difficulty-aware curriculum sampling that dynamically quan-tifies instance difficulty based on predicted F1 scores and confidence. Training begins with high-confidence, high-F1 samples (i.e., easy cases) and gradually incorporates harder ones with lower scores. This progressive schedule enables the model to first master reasoning in dense contexts, then adapt to long-range, complex scenarios, mirroring the incremen-tal nature of human learning. Specifically, for each training sample xi, we compute two indicators utilizing a cold-start model: (1) Retrieval F1 Score fi: measures overlap between predicted and ground-truth utterance/image ID sets; and (2) 

Prediction Entropy hi: quantifies uncertainty as the average entropy of predicted token distributions. Each instance is then assigned a difficulty level based on the following criteria: 

di =



Easy , fi ≥ Q(f )0.75 and hi ≤ Q(h)0.25 

Confusing , fi ≤ Q(f )0.25 and hi ≥ Q(h)0.75 

Hard , fi ≤ Q(f )0.25 and hi ≤ Q(h)0.25 

Medium , otherwise (7) Here, Q(f ) 

> p

and Q(h) 

> p

denote the p-th percentiles of F1 and entropy distributions. “Easy” samples are confident and cor-rect, “Confusing” are uncertain and incorrect, while “Hard” are incorrect yet overconfident. 5.2 FFRS: Fragment System for Corpus-level FFR 

5.2.1 System Overview 

While F 2RVLM effectively addresses FFR within a single di-alogue, real-world applications often demand retrieval across large-scale multi-dialogue corpora, where relevant fragments may be sparsely distributed over thousands of conversations. In such scenarios, relying solely on MLLM-based generation for fragment-level inference introduces significant scalability and latency challenges, the model must perform heavy con-textual reasoning over each dialogue independently, leading to substantial computational overhead and inference latency that scales linearly with corpus size. To overcome this bottleneck, we propose FFRS, a scal-able two-stage retrieval system designed to balance semantic precision and retrieval efficiency for corpus-level FFR. As 10 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Fig. 5 Overview of the proposed Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval System (FFRS) for Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues , which consists of an offline indexing stage and an online retrieval stage. (1) Offline indexing. First, long-form multi-modal dialogues are decomposed—under the guidance of a visual language model—into structurally explicit and semantically minimal fragments. Next, these fragments are encoded into dense vector representations and stored in a vector database to enable scalable, low-latency retrieval. (2) Online retrieval. Given a user query, F 2RVLM performs query-guided fine-grained reasoning to precisely locate relevant content within each candidate fragment. Finally, retrieved fragments are aggregated at the dialogue level to produce a structured and contextually complete output. 

illustrated in Fig.5, FFRS adopts an “offline structured index-ing and online dual-stage retrieval” paradigm. 1. Offline phase. All multi-modal dialogues are first decom-posed into fine-grained semantic units called fragments. Each fragment is encoded utilizing a dedicated Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) trained with a dual-level con-trastive objective, and stored in a vector database. This structural indexing enables fast similarity search without repeatedly parsing full dialogues at runtime. 2. Online phase. Upon receiving a user query, the system first conducts fast embedding-based retrieval to coarsely recall the Top-K candidate fragments utilizing FEM. These candidates are then further refined by F 2RVLM, which conducts more precise reasoning to locate sub-content that better matches the query semantics. This hybrid stage decouples heavy semantic modeling from the real-time path, allowing FFRS to scale to large corpora while retaining the nuanced understanding needed for fine-grained multi-modal retrieval. 

5.2.2 System Pipeline 

The overall system consists of five core steps, forming a closed-loop retrieval pipeline that spans from dialogue de-composition and fragment encoding to candidate retrieval and final result aggregation. We describe each step in detail below, with the pipeline illustrated in Algorithm 1. 

(1) Dialogue Decomposition. Long-form dialogues, particu-larly those exceeding 100 turns and covering multiple distinct topics, pose significant challenges for direct semantic mod-eling. Without structural decomposition, feeding such raw dialogues into retrieval models typically leads to semantic di-lution and a reduced ability to accurately match user queries with relevant responses. This issue is analogous to locating a specific passage in a book that lacks chapters or headings: 

Algorithm 1: FFRS: Fine-grained Fragment Re-trieval System Pipeline 

Input: User query q, Multi-modal dialogue corpus D

Output: Retrieved fragment-level results R 

> 1

Offline Phase (Structured Indexing)  

> 2

Step 1: Dialogue Decomposition  

> 3

for each dialogue D ∈ D do  

> 4

Predict semantic fragment boundaries {f1, f 2, . . . }

utilizing the Fragment Boundary Prediction Model; Assign global fragment IDs and re-index local turn IDs;  

> 5

end  

> 6

Step 2: Fragment Embedding & Indexing  

> 7

for each fragment f do  

> 8

Encode f utilizing the Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) with dual-level contrastive learning to obtain vector ef ; 

> 9

Store (ef , dialog-id , frag id ) into vector database I; 

> 10

end  

> 11

Online Phase (Dual-stage Retrieval)  

> 12

Step 3: Coarse Recall  

> 13

Encode query q into embedding eq via FEM;  

> 14

Perform Top-K vector similarity search over index I to obtain coarse candidates C; 

> 15

Step 4: Fine-grained Reasoning  

> 16

for each candidate fragment fc ∈ C do  

> 17

Utilizing F 2RVLM to localize fine-grained turn indices within fc: 

> 18

ˆsc ← F2RVLM (q, f c); 

> 19

end  

> 20

Step 5: Fragment Aggregation  

> 21

Group all (fc, ˆsc) by their dialogue IDs;  

> 22

Sort and merge overlapping spans to restore dialogue-level continuity;  

> 23

Generate final structured retrieval output: 

R ← { dialog-id : merged spans }; 

> 24

return R

in the absence of structural guidance, retrieval becomes in-efficient and error-prone. To address this, FFRS employs a multi-modal semantic decomposition strategy that segments each dialogue into minimal, coherent semantic units, referred to as fragments. Each fragment encapsulates a distinct topic Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 11 

or intent (e.g., scheduling a meeting, describing a product, posing a question), enabling more precise content localization and mitigating interference from irrelevant dialogue turns. This strategy is operationalized through a Fragment Boundary Prediction Model built on Qwen2.5-VL-3B (Wang et al., 2024b), which is fine-tuned using instruction tuning on our annotated MLDR dataset. The model processes the entire dialogue and outputs a set of fragment intervals, e.g., “[[1, 2, 3]”, “[5, 6, 7, 8]]”, indicating that turns 1–3 form one fragment, and 5–8 form another. Each fragment is assigned a global dialogue-level ID (e.g., “Frag-1 of Dialog-5”) to track its position in the original conversation. Meanwhile, all utterances and images within the fragment are re-indexed with local turn-level IDs starting from 0. This structured representation supports fragment-level retrieval and enables subsequent re-aggregation at the dialogue level. By convert-ing long, unstructured dialogues into structured sequences of fragments, this step lays a solid foundation for the embedding, indexing, and retrieval steps of the FFRS framework. 

(2) Fragment Embedding & Offline Indexing. Once dia-logues are decomposed into semantically independent frag-ments, each fragment is encoded into a fixed-dimensional dense vector to enable efficient indexing and retrieval. This step serves as a critical bridge between unstructured dialogue data and a structured, queryable memory space, supporting scalable vector-based search. To capture fine-grained semantic information and ensure effective representation, we propose a dedicated Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) (see Sec.5.3), which is trained to encode localized intent and contextual clues at the frag-ment level. The resulting embeddings are stored in a vector database, along with metadata such as the corresponding dia-logue ID and fragment ID. This storage format facilitates fast similarity computation using cosine distance and supports scalable retrieval in high-dimensional embedding space. The indexing pipeline is also designed to be incrementally updat-able, allowing newly arriving dialogues to be decomposed, embedded, and inserted into the index without reprocess-ing the entire corpus. Overall, this embedding and indexing step lays the foundation for fast coarse retrieval and accu-rate downstream reasoning. By transforming decomposed multi-modal fragments into searchable vector representations while preserving semantic granularity, the FFRS framework ensures both retrieval scalability and semantic fidelity. 

(3) Coarse Recall via Similarity Search. In the online stage, FFRS begins with a fast coarse-grained recall step to narrow down the search space. Given a user query, often a single sentence or paragraph drawn from real-world task contexts, the system encodes it using the same FEM used in the offline stage, ensuring semantic space alignment. A Top-K vector retrieval is then conducted using cosine similarity between the query embedding and all stored fragment vectors. This step rapidly selects the K most semantically similar frag-ments from the corpus, substantially reducing the number of candidates passed to the next step. This coarse filtering brings two major advantages: (i) it transfers the bulk of re-trieval computation to efficient vector operations, avoiding expensive inference over the entire corpus; and (ii) it en-sures that system latency remains low even as the corpus scales to millions of fragments. The hyperparameter K can be adjusted to balance recall and efficiency. 

(4) Fine-grained Reasoning with F 2RVLM. While coarse retrieval effectively narrows the corpus to a shortlist of seman-tically similar candidate fragments, these candidates may still contain false positives or lack fine-grained alignment with the user query. To ensure more precise content matching, we incorporate a fine-grained verification step utilizing the F2RVLM model. Conditioned on the user query, F 2RVLM performs detailed reasoning over each candidate fragment to localize the specific subset of turns that directly address the query intent. As illustrated in Fig.5, the model outputs a set of turn-level indices within each fragment, e.g., “[6, 7, 8, 10] in Frag-1 of Dialog-5”, indicating the most relevant dialogue spans. This enables the system to move beyond fragment-level retrieval toward sub-fragment localization, achieving more accurate and explainable results. By aligning the re-trieved content at a finer granularity, this step significantly enhances the interpretability and reliability of the retrieval system, laying the foundation for structured aggregation and downstream multi-modal understanding. 

(5) Fragment Aggregation. The final stage of FFRS, Frag-ment Aggregation, is responsible for consolidating the rea-soning outputs from F 2RVLM into structured, dialogue-level retrieval results. While fine-grained inference ensures precise localization within individual fragments, multiple candidate fragments may originate from the same long-form conver-sation. This stage reassembles semantically relevant content within each dialogue to restore contextual continuity and produce a unified retrieval output. Specifically, each verified fragment returned by F 2RVLM is accompanied by metadata, including the dialogue ID, frag-ment ID, and the localized set of turn indices (e.g., “[6, 7, 8, 10]”). During aggregation, fragments are grouped accord-ing to their dialogue ID and sorted based on their original positions. Overlapping or adjacent spans are then merged to eliminate redundancy. This process results in a dialogue-level fragment set containing one or more semantically relevant, non-overlapping spans per dialogue, such as “[1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 28, 29, 35]”. The final output is thus structured at the gran-ularity of entire dialogues: for each matched dialogue, FFRS returns a set of localized sub-fragments along with their asso-ciated text and visual content. This design not only enhances the interpretability and coherence of the retrieval results but also provides a standardized input format for downstream tasks, such as multi-modal dialogue understanding, summa-rization, or context-aware response generation. 12 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

5.3 Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) To support scalable fragment-level retrieval in multi-modal long-form dialogues, we propose a tailored Fragment Em-bedding Model (FEM) that encodes each dialogue fragment into a fixed-dimensional dense representation. This model is central to the offline indexing process in FFRS, enabling coarse semantic filtering via vector similarity. 

5.3.1 Limitations of Existing Embedding Models 

Current multi-modal embedding models face two major limi-tations when applied to long-form, multi-turn dialogues: (1) Coarse training supervision leading to insufficient gran-ularity: Most existing models are pre-trained on sentence-level or document-level data, lacking explicit fragment-level supervision. This results in a granularity mismatch between the query and candidate fragments, leading to unstable re-trieval performance and poor semantic alignment in complex dialogue scenarios. (2) Neglect of contextual and prag-matic dependencies: Existing models often treat dialogues or documents as concatenations of independent sentences. They lack mechanisms to model the natural dependencies that emerge across multiple turns in dialogue, such as ques-tion–answer pairs, elaboration chains, follow-up references, or image-text associations. As a result, the internal coherence of semantically unified fragments is frequently lost during embedding. This severely limits the model’s ability to repre-sent a fragment as a single, cohesive semantic unit. 

5.3.2 The proposed FEM 

To address the limitations of existing multi-modal embedding models in long-form, multi-turn dialogue scenarios, we pro-pose a Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) with a two-level contrastive learning strategy. The core objective is to ensure that: (1) semantically relevant query-fragment pairs are well-aligned at the global level, and (2) internal coherence and pragmatic structure within fragments are preserved via local structure modeling. 

Inter-Fragment Contrastive Loss. The global-level objec-tive aligns semantically matched query-fragment pairs while pushing apart irrelevant ones. By optimizing the embedding space so that each query vector is close to its corresponding fragment and distant from others, the model learns to cap-ture fine-grained semantic alignment. Given a batch of N

queries {qi}Ni=1 and their matched fragments {fi}Ni=1 , the inter-fragment contrastive loss is defined as: 

Linter = −

> N

X

> i=1

log exp( sim (qi, f i)/τ )

PNj=1 exp( sim (qi, f j )/τ ) (8) where sim (·, ·) denotes cosine similarity, and τ is a tempera-ture hyperparameter. 

Intra-Fragment Contrastive Loss. To more effectively cap-ture the internal semantic structure and pragmatic dependen-cies within each fragment, we further decompose it into Ki

fine-grained question–answer (QA) pairs (qki , a ki )Ki

> k=1

. Each query qki reflects a localized communicative intent, such as subtopic initiation, clarification request, or visual reference, while the corresponding answer aki provides a contextually grounded elaboration or response. This decomposition allows the model to learn the latent discourse structure within a frag-ment, including QA dynamics, elaboration chains, and im-age–text grounding patterns. To preserve such intra-fragment coherence, we introduce a contrastive loss that explicitly aligns each query with its corresponding answer while push-ing it away from other mismatched answers within the same fragment. The loss is formulated as: 

Lintra = −

> N

X

> i=1
> Ki

X

> k=1

log exp( sim (qki , a ki )/τ )

PKi 

> m=1

exp( sim (qki , a mi )/τ ) (9) This objective encourages the model to internalize fragment-level cohesion by reinforcing fine-grained semantic bindings between interdependent units. As a result, the learned em-beddings become more sensitive to intra-fragment structure, facilitating robust identification of self-contained, pragmati-cally coherent segments during downstream retrieval. 

Overall Loss. The final training objective combines the two losses with a weighting coefficient λ:

LFEM = Linter + λ · L intra (10) In our implementation, we set λ = 1 .0 and share the same backbone encoder across both contrastive objectives. This design allows FEM to effectively encode both inter-fragment semantic alignment and intra-fragment structural coherence, yielding expressive and retrieval-friendly embeddings for large-scale multi-modal dialogue systems. 

6 Experiments 

This section systematically evaluates FFR under both single-dialogue and corpus-level settings. 6.1 F 2RVLM for Single-Dialogue FFR 

6.1.1 Experimental Settings 

Models & Details. We implement F 2RVLM based on the ms-swift (Zhao et al., 2024) framework, using Qwen-VL-series as the backbone with 2B, 3B, and 7B parameters. Fine-tuning is conducted on the MLDR dataset, with 1,000 samples re-served for validation and the remaining for training. Among the training data, 25% is used for SFT cold start, while the remaining is reserved for RFT. We adopt LoRA (Hu et al., Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 13 

Table 2 Comparison with popular VLMs on the MLDR validation set and WeChat test set. “ †” indicates zero-shot inference without MLDR fine-tuning. “ ∗” indicates models limited by context length, evaluated via sliding-window inference (see Appendix.C.1 for details). Model In-domain Val Set (MLDR) Real-domain Test Set (WeChat) Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%) MCC(%) Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%) MCC(%) CLIP-Embedding † (Radford et al., 2021) 48.74 30.80 42.73 21.14 20.44 49.91 31.56 17.62 BLIP2-Embedding † (Li et al., 2023) 31.88 2.96 23.47 0.00 15.22 52.74 25.05 4.94 E5-V-Embedding † (Jiang et al., 2024a) 53.85 48.83 51.82 28.92 30.33 47.13 36.99 24.40 GME-Embedding † (Zhang et al., 2024) 62.27 23.75 35.52 24.17 29.63 53.11 38.22 26.68 Qwen2.5-VL-7B † (Bai et al., 2025a) 21.20 4.27 7.84 0.00 10.22 16.34 12.58 0.00 MiMo-7B-RL † (Xiaomi, 2025) 67.68 55.19 61.30 45.52 41.74 24.48 30.94 23.68 Qwen2.5-VL-72B † (Bai et al., 2025a) 61.11 67.14 64.09 44.61 32.55 36.95 36.60 25.26 Doubao-Seed-1.6 † (Guo et al., 2025a) 73.83 42.19 54.67 42.57 55.22 28.47 38.63 34.06 Claude-Sonnet-4 † (Anthropic, 2025) 67.21 58.09 62.80 46.57 51.15 40.88 46.30 40.50 GPT-4o † (Jaech et al., 2024) 70.43 52.49 60.32 45.91 56.11 41.82 48.89 42.85 Gemini-2.5-Flash † (Comanici et al., 2025) 70.18 69.30 69.87 54.66 51.89 49.80 53.21 48.22 InternVL3-1B ∗ (Chen et al., 2024b) 67.10 89.89 77.00 64.64 23.88 79.86 37.42 28.33 InternVL3-2B ∗ (Chen et al., 2024b) 75.73 91.86 83.07 74.11 31.59 73.57 44.32 33.34 Ovis2-2B ∗ (Lu et al., 2024) 76.97 42.48 54.82 43.98 40.83 54.51 46.69 33.16 DeepSeek-VL2-Tiny (Wu et al., 2024a) 62.97 84.25 72.23 56.59 29.83 21.12 24.73 16.79 mPLUG-Owl3-2B (Ye et al., 2024) 74.86 83.18 78.88 67.59 18.35 45.99 26.37 11.61 Qwen2-VL-2B (Wang et al., 2024b) 74.97 92.99 83.07 74.18 23.20 76.03 36.65 26.55 Qwen2.5-VL-3B (Bai et al., 2025a) 80.35 91.41 85.57 77.98 33.75 75.82 47.60 39.56 LLaVA-1.5-7B-hf ∗ (Liu et al., 2023b) 68.15 92.06 78.43 66.95 20.91 81.27 33.61 22.99 MiMo-7B-SFT (Xiaomi, 2025) 81.61 93.25 87.08 80.35 49.14 46.58 47.98 40.71 MiMo-7B-RL (Xiaomi, 2025) 80.90 93.46 86.71 79.78 49.46 48.22 49.05 41.84 Qwen2-VL-7B (Wang et al., 2024b) 83.15 90.72 86.81 79.92 42.80 69.60 53.54 45.75 Qwen2.5-VL-7B (Bai et al., 2025a) 81.52 91.42 86.23 79.00 39.99 71.30 51.71 43.65 InternVL3-8B ∗ (Chen et al., 2024b) 80.67 92.98 86.43 79.35 34.08 75.52 47.07 36.65 DeepSeek-VL2-Small-16B (Wu et al., 2024a) 77.52 91.13 83.82 75.23 47.43 19.48 27.91 24.51 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-2B 79.64 89.55 84.35 76.07 26.97 72.00 40.46 30.90 

F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-3B 82.74 91.65 87.00 80.19 45.24 70.86 55.60 48.09 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-7B 84.02 90.67 87.25 80.60 57.21 67.46 62.07 55.46 F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-7B 83.24 91.60 87.24 80.55 54.83 65.16 59.60 52.39 

2022) for parameter-efficient adaptation during both the SFT and RFT stages. During GRPO fine-tuning in RFT, we sam-ple G = 8 candidate responses for each instance. The reward weights are set to λutt = λimg = 0 .5, and the exponential length penalty base is γ = 0 .95 . Curriculum sampling begins with 10% of the easy and medium-level instances and grad-ually incorporates confusing and hard instances as training progresses. To enhance training stability and efficiency, we adopt the dynamic sampling strategy from DAPO (Yu et al., 2025). Gradient checkpointing and FlashAttention are uti-lized to enhance training efficiency. All models are trained for 1 epoch on 8 ×A100 GPUs. For evaluation, we compare F 2RVLM against a compre-hensive set of MLLMs, including proprietary models such as GPT-4o (Jaech et al., 2024), Gemini-2.5 (Comanici et al., 2025), Doubao-Seed-1.6 (Guo et al., 2025a), and Claude-Sonnet-4 (Anthropic, 2025); open-source models including LLaVa (Liu et al., 2023b), Qwen-VL-series (Wang et al., 2024b), DeepSeek-VL2-series (Wu et al., 2024a), InternVL3-series (Chen et al., 2024b), Ovis2 (Lu et al., 2024), Owl3 (Ye et al., 2024), and Mimo-VL (Xiaomi, 2025); as well as embedding models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023), E5-V (Jiang et al., 2024a), and GME (Zhang et al., 2024). Open-source models are fine-tuned on MLDR using SFT, while proprietary and embedding models are evaluated in inference-only mode. 

Metrics. We evaluate fragment-level retrieval performance utilizing four metrics: Precision, Recall, F1 Score, and Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), computed sep-arately for utterance IDs and image IDs. To obtain unified scores, we average the F1 and MCC values across both modal-ities and calculate the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall to reflect joint retrieval performance. 

6.1.2 Comparison with Popular VLMs 

Overall Retrieval Performance. Table 2 summarizes fragment-level retrieval results on the in-domain MLDR vali-dation set and the real-domain WeChat test set. Key observa-tions include: (i) F 2RVLM achieves SOTA performance in 14 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Table 3 Comparison with popular VLMs on the MLDR validation set. We report Precision, Recall, F1, and MCC for utterance, image, and joint predictions. “ †” indicates zero-shot inference without MLDR fine-tuning. Model Utterance Retrieval Image Retrieval Joint Retrieval Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC CLIP-Embedding † 45.21 20.42 28.13 12.18 52.86 62.63 57.33 30.11 48.74 30.80 42.73 21.14 BLIP2-Embedding † 30.54 78.97 44.05 0.00 33.33 1.51 2.89 0.00 31.88 2.96 23.47 0.00 E5-V-Embedding † 54.39 40.16 46.21 27.31 53.32 62.25 57.44 30.54 53.85 48.83 51.82 28.92 GME-Embedding † 56.96 33.09 41.86 26.09 68.66 18.52 29.18 22.25 62.27 23.75 35.52 24.17 Qwen2.5-VL-7B † 23.29 3.08 5.45 0.00 19.46 6.95 10.24 0.00 21.20 4.27 7.84 0.00 MiMo-7B-RL † 70.18 46.23 55.74 42.74 65.35 68.44 66.86 48.30 67.68 55.19 61.30 45.52 Qwen2.5-VL-72B † 62.42 60.67 61.54 44.27 59.85 75.15 66.63 44.95 61.11 67.14 64.09 44.61 Doubao-Seed-1.6 † 79.69 33.69 47.36 40.79 68.78 56.42 61.99 44.36 73.83 42.19 54.67 42.57 Claude-Sonnet-4 † 69.88 48.51 57.26 43.83 64.74 72.37 68.34 49.31 67.21 58.09 62.80 46.57 GPT-4o † 73.90 46.51 57.09 46.11 67.28 60.24 63.56 45.70 70.43 52.49 60.32 45.91 Gemini-2.5-Flash † 68.85 64.85 66.79 52.27 71.56 74.42 72.96 57.06 70.18 69.30 69.87 54.66 InternVL3-1B 62.49 89.16 73.48 60.64 72.45 90.63 80.53 68.65 67.10 89.89 77.00 64.64 InternVL3-2B 72.68 91.31 80.94 71.84 79.04 92.41 85.20 76.38 75.73 91.86 83.07 74.11 Ovis2-2B 73.85 46.27 56.90 45.33 80.37 39.26 52.75 42.63 76.97 42.48 54.82 43.98 mPLUG-Owl3-2B 71.70 81.80 76.42 64.93 78.32 84.60 81.34 70.25 74.86 83.18 78.88 67.59 Qwen2-VL-2B 71.88 92.66 80.96 71.97 78.35 93.32 85.18 76.38 74.97 92.99 83.07 74.18 Qwen2.5-VL-3B 77.21 91.22 83.64 75.85 83.75 91.60 87.50 80.12 80.35 91.41 85.57 77.98 DeepSeek-VL2-Tiny-3B 58.54 83.69 68.89 52.87 68.12 84.81 75.56 60.30 62.97 84.25 72.23 56.59 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-2B 76.84 88.86 82.42 73.97 82.64 90.25 86.28 78.16 79.64 89.55 84.35 76.07 

F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-3B 80.71 90.49 85.32 78.35 84.88 92.84 88.68 82.03 82.74 91.65 87.00 80.19 LLaVa-1.5-7B-hf 63.99 91.93 75.46 63.72 72.88 92.19 81.41 70.18 68.15 92.06 78.43 66.95 MiMo-7B-SFT 79.01 92.55 85.25 78.28 84.38 93.97 88.92 82.41 81.61 93.25 87.08 80.35 MiMo-7B-RL 78.17 92.85 84.88 77.75 83.63 94.08 88.55 81.81 80.90 93.46 86.71 79.78 Qwen2-VL-7B 80.60 89.60 84.86 77.66 85.86 91.87 88.76 82.18 83.15 90.72 86.81 79.92 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 78.74 90.88 84.37 76.93 84.51 91.98 88.09 81.07 81.52 91.42 86.23 79.00 InternVL3-8B 77.74 92.48 84.47 77.14 83.82 93.48 88.39 81.56 80.67 92.98 86.43 79.35 DeepSeek-VL2-Small-16B 74.93 90.56 82.01 73.40 80.29 91.71 85.62 77.05 77.52 91.13 83.82 75.23 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-7B 82.19 88.99 85.46 78.58 85.93 92.41 89.05 82.63 84.02 90.67 87.25 80.60 F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-7B 81.64 90.49 85.84 79.12 84.91 92.73 88.65 81.97 83.24 91.60 87.24 80.55 

both domains. The 7B variant tops MLDR with 87.25% F1, and leads on WeChat with 62.07% F1. Its 3B version also out-performs larger competitors such as MiMo-7B-RL, and GPT-4o. (ii) MLDR Fine-tuning significantly boosts cross-domain retrieval. Qwen2.5-VL-7B improves from 12.58% (zero-shot) to 51.71% F1 on WeChat after MLDR tuning, demonstrat-ing MLDR’s value as a supervised resource for fragment retrieval. Moreover, F 2RVLM offers less performance degra-dation from MLDR to WeChat compared to other models, indicating stronger generalization in real-world long-form dialogues. (iii) F 2RVLM consistently outperforms baselines with comparable or larger parameter scales, validating the effectiveness of our GRPO-based training with curriculum sampling and multi-objective reward optimization. (iv) Qual-itative analysis provided in Appendix.D.1 further verifies the robustness of F 2RVLM. Case studies show that the model accurately identifies semantically relevant fragments, even when key evidence is distributed across multiple turns, high-lighting its strong alignment with real user intent. 

Detailed Retrieval Performance. Tables 3 and 4 further re-port the evaluation metrics assessing the sentence and image elements contained within each predicted fragment. Preci-sion, recall, F1, and MCC are computed separately for utter-ance IDs and image IDs, and their averages form the unified fragment-level scores, as shown in Table 2. This design en-ables a clearer assessment of how well a model captures the internal composition of a fragment rather than merely identifying its boundary. Key observations include: 1. Utterance correctness remains the most challenging com-ponent. Many baselines retrieve fragments that contain correct images but inaccurate or redundant sentences, leading to a persistent gap between utterance-level and image-level F1. F 2RVLM substantially reduces this gap, achieving 85.32% F1 on MLDR and 58.98% on WeChat. This demonstrates that fragment-level rewards and cur-riculum sampling effectively strengthen fine-grained tex-tual grounding. 2. Image selection benefits from fragment-aware grounding rather than simple visual–text matching. Although sev-Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 15 

Table 4 Comparison with popular VLMs on the WeChat test set. We report Precision, Recall, F1, and MCC for utterance, image, and joint predictions. “†” indicates zero-shot inference without MLDR fine-tuning. “ ∗” indicates models limited by context length, evaluated via sliding-window inference. Model Utterance Retrieval Image Retrieval Joint Retrieval Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC CLIP-Embedding † 16.44 35.99 22.57 9.15 27.01 81.37 40.55 26.08 20.44 49.91 31.56 17.62 BLIP2-Embedding † 11.00 71.41 19.07 0.00 24.68 41.81 31.04 11.97 15.22 52.74 25.05 4.94 E5-V-Embedding † 34.73 35.82 35.27 26.80 26.92 68.89 38.72 22.00 30.33 47.13 36.99 24.40 GME-Embedding † 32.54 39.12 35.52 26.51 27.19 82.67 40.93 26.86 29.63 53.11 38.22 26.68 Qwen2.5-VL-7B † 13.95 11.38 12.53 2.77 8.07 28.98 12.62 0.00 10.22 16.34 12.58 0.00 MiMo-7B-RL † 41.63 22.70 29.38 24.49 41.85 26.55 32.49 22.88 41.74 24.48 30.94 23.68 Qwen2.5-VL-72B † 28.25 27.90 28.07 18.88 38.41 54.70 45.13 31.63 32.55 36.95 36.60 25.26 Doubao-Seed-1.6 † 61.83 21.81 32.24 32.49 49.89 41.01 45.02 35.62 55.22 28.47 38.63 34.06 Claude-Sonnet-4 † 60.38 29.89 39.98 37.69 44.36 64.68 52.63 43.31 51.15 40.88 46.30 40.50 GPT-4o † 60.43 32.19 42.01 39.18 52.37 59.65 55.77 46.52 56.11 41.82 48.89 42.85 Gemini-2.5-Flash † 48.65 36.86 41.94 35.92 55.60 76.76 64.49 60.52 51.89 49.80 53.21 48.22 InternVL3-1B ∗ 19.97 86.85 32.48 15.27 29.69 73.92 42.37 41.39 23.88 79.86 37.42 28.33 InternVL3-2B ∗ 28.34 81.31 42.02 22.41 35.70 67.18 46.62 44.27 31.59 73.57 44.32 33.34 Ovis2-2B ∗ 39.72 56.87 46.77 23.54 42.00 52.34 46.60 42.79 40.83 54.51 46.69 33.16 mPLUG-Owl3-2B 20.65 45.01 28.31 16.78 16.51 47.01 24.44 6.44 18.35 45.99 26.37 11.61 Qwen2-VL-2B 18.38 86.49 30.32 23.64 31.46 67.83 42.98 29.45 23.20 76.03 36.65 26.55 Qwen2.5-VL-3B 27.77 79.03 41.11 35.70 43.02 72.86 54.09 43.41 33.75 75.82 47.60 39.56 DeepSeek-VL2-Tiny-3B 21.95 27.96 24.59 13.69 46.52 16.97 24.87 19.89 29.83 21.12 24.73 16.79 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-2B 20.99 82.21 33.45 27.11 37.72 64.04 47.48 34.70 26.97 72.00 40.46 30.90 

F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-3B 39.54 71.98 51.04 45.31 52.87 69.78 60.16 50.88 45.24 70.86 55.60 48.09 LLaVA-1.5-7B-hf ∗ 18.16 89.80 30.21 9.78 24.66 74.21 37.02 36.20 20.91 81.27 33.61 22.99 MiMo-7B-SFT 40.06 52.03 45.27 37.60 63.55 42.16 50.69 43.82 49.14 46.58 47.98 40.71 MiMo-7B-RL 40.05 53.53 45.82 38.23 64.66 43.87 52.28 45.46 49.46 48.22 49.05 41.84 Qwen2-VL-7B 36.28 71.65 48.17 42.20 52.17 67.65 58.91 49.30 42.80 69.60 53.54 45.75 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 34.74 71.70 46.80 40.74 47.11 70.90 56.61 46.57 39.99 71.30 51.71 43.65 InternVL3-8B ∗ 31.05 80.78 44.86 25.98 37.76 70.90 49.28 47.33 34.08 75.52 47.07 36.65 DeepSeek-VL2-Small-16B 40.13 24.92 30.75 24.93 57.98 16.00 25.07 24.09 47.43 19.48 27.91 24.51 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-7B 52.36 67.51 58.98 53.50 63.05 67.42 65.16 57.41 57.21 67.46 62.07 55.46 F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-7B 52.44 64.51 57.85 52.16 57.46 65.82 61.36 52.63 54.83 65.16 59.60 52.39 

eral VLMs reach high image recall, they often include visually similar yet irrelevant frames. F 2RVLM maintains a more balanced precision–recall profile (e.g., 88.68% on MLDR; 65.16% on WeChat), indicating improved selec-tivity in identifying images that genuinely belong to the target fragment. Overall, these results show that F 2RVLM not only identi-fies the correct fragment boundaries but also provides more faithful intra-fragment composition, aligning both textual and visual elements more accurately with the ground truth. 

Discussion about Recall Metric. While models like LLaVA achieve higher recall, they often sacrifice precision by retriev-ing many irrelevant fragments. In contrast, our model incor-porates a penalty term in the RF1 to suppress over-retrieval, encouraging the selection of fewer but more semantically consistent fragments, better aligned with human preferences and fragment-level retrieval objectives. 

Fragment-level Consistency and Alignment. To assess VLMs’ ability to capture dialogue structure and semantic alignment, we introduce two metrics on the WeChat test 

Fig. 6 Human subjective evaluation results on the WeChat test set. 

We randomly sample 200 dialogues and ask expert annotators to select the top-performing model across three criteria: Coverage, Relevance, and Coherence. 

set: Fragment Order Consistency (average cosine similarity between adjacent retrieved elements) and Query-Fragment Similarity (average similarity between the query and each retrieved element), as reported in Table 5. F 2RVLM achieves 16 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Table 5 Comparison with popular VLMs on the real-domain WeChat test set, evaluated by Fragment Order Consistency and Query-Fragment Similarity. “ †” indicates zero-shot inference without MLDR fine-tuning. Model #Params Fragment Consis. Query Sim. Doubao-Seed-1.6 †                         

> Closed -Source 27.89 31.06 Gemini-2.5-Flash †37.67 41.44 Claude-Sonnet-4 †42.29 46.64 GPT-4o †43.17 48.21 Qwen2.5-VL †72B 45.98 48.49 DeepSeek-VL2-Small 16B 12.52 13.67 MiMo-VL-RL 7B 34.69 36.69 Qwen2-VL 7B 55.28 59.49 Qwen2.5-VL 7B 54.81 58.39
> F2RVLM 3B 60.53 61.18

Fig. 7 Performance comparison across dialogue turn groups on the real-domain WeChat test set. We report F1 and MCC across three dialogue turn ranges: short ( <35 turns), medium (35–65 turns), and long ( >65 turns). 

Table 6 Ablation study on reward components and curriculum sampling on MLDR validation and WeChat test sets.                                

> RF1 RFragment Curriculum In-domain Real-domain F1(%) MCC(%) F1(%) MCC(%)
> ✗✗✓86.02 78.69 53.39 46.07
> ✓✗✓86.39 79.24 54.68 47.41
> ✓✓✗84.69 77.53 50.65 43.71
> ✓✓✓87.00 80.19 55.60 48.09

the highest scores on both, outperforming larger open- and closed-source models. This demonstrates its superior ability to retrieve coherent, semantically aligned fragments, enabled by the order-consistency reward in GRPO training. 

Discussion about Dialogue Turns. Fig.7 reports model per-formance on the WeChat test set across short ( <35 turns), medium (35–65 turns), and long ( >65 turns) dialogues. F2RVLM-7B (Qwen2) consistently achieves the highest F1 and MCC scores as dialogue turn increases, with minimal performance degradation compared to other models, which demonstrates its robustness in long-context reasoning. 

Subjective Results. We conduct a human evaluation on 200 dialogues from the WeChat test set, comparing our 7B model against Gemini-2.5, GPT-4o, and Claude-4 across three crite-ria: coverage, relevance, and fragment coherence (Details are provided in Appendix.D.1). As depicted in Fig.6, our model 

Table 7 Ablation study of different SFT and GRPO data ratios in F2RVLM on MLDR validation and WeChat test sets. Training Strategy In-domain Real-domain F1(%) MCC(%) F1(%) MCC(%) All SFT 85.57 77.98 47.60 39.56 All GRPO(0.1% SFT) 82.14 73.29 45.47 37.81 5%SFT+95%GRPO 84.58 78.65 53.64 42.83 10%SFT+90%GRPO 86.44 79.26 54.51 47.18 25%SFT+75%GRPO 87.00 80.19 55.60 48.09     

> 50%SFT+50%GRPO 87.37 81.05 54.32 47.33

is consistently preferred by annotators, receiving the highest top-choice counts in all aspects, demonstrating superior se-mantic completeness, alignment, and fluency in real-world dialogue retrieval. 

6.1.3 Ablation Results 

Effectiveness of Reward Functions and Curriculum Learning. This section presents ablation studies to evalu-ate the effectiveness of the proposed reward functions and personalized curriculum learning, focusing on joint F1 and MCC metrics (Table 6). (i) Replacing standard accuracy with 

RF1 significantly improves performance, while incorporating fragment order consistency RFragment further enhances cross-domain F1 and MCC, highlighting the role of intra-fragment semantic consistency. (ii) Integrating difficulty-aware curricu-lum sampling into GRPO yields consistent gains: in-domain F1 improves from 84.69% to 87.00%, and real-domain F1 from 50.65% to 55.60%, validating the effectiveness of pro-gressive learning from easier to harder samples. 

Training Ratio Between SFT and GRPO-based RFT. Ta-ble 7 explores the impact of different proportions of SFT and GRPO-based RFT on model performance. We observe the following: (i) Using GRPO alone underperforms com-pared to using only SFT, highlighting the indispensable role of supervised learning for cold-start in providing stable and accurate training signals; (ii) As the proportion of GRPO increases, overall performance gradually surpasses that of pure SFT, demonstrating the effectiveness of RFT for dia-logue fragment retrieval; (iii) A 25% SFT and 75% GRPO ratio achieves the best results on the real-domain test set, while increasing SFT to 50% slightly improves in-domain validation performance but compromises generalization to real-world scenarios. 6.2 FFRS for Corpus-level FFR This section first evaluate the performance of key components proposed in each step, including the fragment boundary pre-diction model and the fragment embedding model, followed by the overall system performance. Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 17                           

> Table 8 Performance comparison of different models in long-form dialogue decomposition in terms of Pairwise and B-cubed precision, recall, and F1 scores. Model Pairwise B-cubed Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%) Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%) Qwen2.5-VL-72B (Bai et al., 2025a) 58.4 66.9 60.3 60.5 68.1 61.1 GPT-4o (Jaech et al., 2024) 77.5 84.1 78.6 80.2 92.5 83.9
> Our model-3B 81.2 92.2 83.6 83.8 94.2 86.7

6.2.1 Evaluation of Fragment Boundary Prediction Model 

Models & Details. We fine-tune the pretrained MLLM Qwen2.5-VL-3B (Bai et al., 2025a) on our curated MLDR dataset, which contains 23,584 multi-modal long-form dia-logues with manually annotated fragment boundaries. To ef-ficiently adapt the model while preserving its general conver-sational and reasoning abilities, we apply parameter-efficient LoRA tuning and implement the entire training workflow using the ms-swift framework. During training, the model re-ceives the full multi-turn dialogue as input and is supervised to output a set of fragment boundaries, formatted as clusters of utterance IDs (e.g., [[0,1,2], [3,4,5]]). This supervision encourages the model to identify coherent discourse units that align with natural conversational segmentation. For evaluation, we reserve 10% of the MLDR dataset as a held-out test set. The predicted fragment clusters are compared against the ground-truth annotations to assess how accurately the fine-tuned model captures semantic bound-aries within long-form dialogues and generalizes to unseen conversations. 

Metrics. We evaluate the quality of predicted dialogue frag-mentations using two clustering-based metrics: Pairwise Precision/Recall/F1 (Shi et al., 2018) and B-cubed Preci-sion/Recall/F1 (G ¨unther et al., 2025). Both metrics compute precision, recall, and F1-score, which are harmonic means of precision and recall. The key difference between them lies in the granularity of the evaluation (see Appendix.C.2 for details). 

Performance Comparison. The evaluation results of our model and the baseline models (Qwen2.5-VL-72B and GPT-4o) on the MLDR dataset in long-form dialogue decomposi-tion, as shown in Table 8, demonstrate that our model outper-forms the baseline models across all Pairwise and B-cubed metrics. Specifically, our model achieves 81.2% precision, 92.2% recall, and 83.6% F1 score for Pairwise metrics, and 83.8% precision, 94.2% recall, and 86.7% F1 score for B-cubed metrics. These results indicate the effectiveness of our model in decomposing long-form dialogues into semanti-cally coherent fragments, ensuring high precision and recall in both global and local content alignment. Such accurate fragmentation provides clean, well-structured semantic units, which serve as a reliable foundation for the subsequent em-bedding, indexing, and fine-grained retrieval stages of the FFRS pipeline. 

6.2.2 Evaluation of Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) 

Models & Details. We adopt GME-Qwen2-VL-2B (Zhang et al., 2024) as the backbone for our Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) and fine-tune it on our custom-built MLDR dataset. Each dialogue in MLDR contains multiple annotated ground-truth fragments, and each fragment is paired with a corresponding query. Based on this structure, we extract all fragment–query pairs, resulting in 62,654 Query–Fragment instances for training FEM’s global semantic alignment. Fur-thermore, to enable FEM to learn intra-fragment dependen-cies (see Eq.9), we decompose each fragment into multiple Question–Answer (QA) pairs, which serve as training exam-ples for the local contrastive objective. To rigorously evaluate the semantic representation capa-bility of FEM, we construct a high-quality Query–Fragment test set specifically designed to measure the model’s ability to retrieve the correct fragment within the top-K search results. The construction process follows three steps: (i) Sentence Vector Extraction: We encode every query using BERT to obtain high-dimensional semantic vectors that capture their underlying meanings. (ii) Topic Clustering: To ensure seman-tic diversity in the test set, we apply K-means clustering on all query vectors and set the number of clusters to 20. This guarantees that the test set covers a wide range of semantic themes. (iii) Semantic Diversity Sampling: We proportionally sample 500 Query–Fragment pairs across the clusters, en-suring that the test set reflects diverse semantic contexts and allows evaluation of the model’s robustness across different dialogue topics and structures. We compare FEM against several mainstream multi-modal embedding models, including Jina-embeddings-v4 (G ¨unther et al., 2025), VLM2Vec (Jiang et al., 2024b), LamRA (Liu et al., 2025a), MonoQwen-ReRanker (Chaf-fin and Lac, 2024), and GME-Qwen2-VL-2B (Zhang et al., 2024). 

Evaluation Protocol & Metrics. To evaluate the proposed embedding model, we adopt a Query–Fragment retrieval set-ting. Given a query q and its ground-truth fragment f ∗, the model encodes q into an embedding vector eq , and encodes all candidate fragments into {efj }. We compute cosine simi-18 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al.                                                             

> Table 9 Performance comparison of various multi-modal embedding models on the Query–Fragment retrieval task. Results are reported in terms of Recall@K. “ †” indicates zero-shot inference without Query–Fragment data fine-tuning. Multi-modal Embedding Model Recall@1(%) Recall@5(%) Recall@10(%) Recall@15(%) Recall@20(%) GME-Qwen2-VL(2B) †(Zhang et al., 2024) 38.8 65.0 74.4 79.4 83.4 MonoQwen-ReRanker(2B) †(Chaffin and Lac, 2024) 27.6 56.0 70.6 76.8 80.4 Jina-embeddings-v4(3B) †(G¨ unther et al., 2025) 21.2 48.8 57.6 64.3 69.0 VLM2Vec(7B) †(Jiang et al., 2024b) 29.8 47.8 54.5 62.1 67.5 LamRA(7B) †(Liu et al., 2025a) 28.2 47.6 53.2 61.3 66.8 GME-Qwen2-VL w/ Inter-Fragment Contrastive 58.0 87.8 92.4 96.0 97.2 GME-Qwen2-VL w/ Intra-Fragment Contrastive 52.6 83.4 91.0 93.8 95.8
> FEM (Ours) 62.8 89.6 94.2 97.4 98.6
> Table 10 Comparison of average cosine similarity scores between query embeddings and their paired fragment embeddings across different multi-modal embedding models, where higher similarity indicates better semantic alignment. Model GME Jina-embeddings-v4 LamRA FEM Cosine Similarity 0.3916 0.3711 0.2937 0.4374

larity scores between the query embedding and each fragment embedding, and rank all fragments accordingly. Retrieval is considered successful if the ground-truth fragment f ∗ ap-pears in the Top-K ranked results. The evaluation metric is Recall@ K, where K ∈ { 1, 5, 10 , 15 , 20 }. This metric directly evaluates both the semantic fidelity of the learned embeddings—whether relevant queries and fragments are mapped closely in the embedding space—and the practi-cal retrieval accuracy of the model under different levels of search depth. 

Performance Comparison. Table 9 reports the results of our Fragment Embedding Model (FEM) and several representative multi-modal embedding baselines on the Query–Fragment retrieval task. The baselines (marked with †)are evaluated in a zero-shot setting, without any task-specific fine-tuning. Across all Recall@ K metrics, our FEM sub-stantially outperforms the zero-shot embedding models as well as the ablated variants. Overall, FEM achieves 62.8% Recall@1, outperforming the strongest zero-shot baseline (GME-Qwen2-VL-2B) by +24.0 percentage points, and sur-passing other models by an even larger margin (e.g., +41.6 over Jina-embeddings-v4). At larger retrieval depths, the ad-vantage becomes more pronounced: FEM reaches 89.6% Re-call@5, 94.2% Recall@10, and exceeds 98% performance at Recall@20, indicating that nearly all ground-truth fragments are successfully recalled within the top retrieved candidates. In addition to retrieval accuracy, we further analyze the in-trinsic quality of fragment embeddings by measuring the aver-age cosine similarity between each query and its ground-truth fragment embedding. As shown in Table 10, existing multi-modal embedding models, such as GM (Zhang et al., 2024), Jina-embeddings-v4 (G ¨unther et al., 2025), and LamRA (Liu et al., 2025a), exhibit relatively low semantic alignment be-tween Query–Fragment pairs. In contrast, our FEM achieves the highest similarity score of 0.4374, indicating that the learned embeddings preserve stronger semantic correspon-dence even before retrieval ranking is applied. This higher intrinsic alignment provides a complementary perspective to the Recall@ K results in Table 9, further demonstrating that FEM produces more discriminative and semantically coherent fragment representations. 

Ablation Study. We further evaluate two ablated variants that isolate the contributions of the proposed contrastive objec-tives. The inter-fragment contrast improves global semantic alignment (58.0% Recall@1), while the intra-fragment con-trast enhances local structural coherence (52.6% Recall@1). However, neither alone matches the full FEM, demonstrating that both global and local contrastive signals are essential and complementary. Their combination yields the best perfor-mance across all settings. These results collectively indicate that our dual-level contrastive learning enables FEM to (i) learn highly discriminative fragment-level embeddings, (ii) better preserve discourse structure, and (iii) robustly general-ize across diverse dialogue topics. This strong retrieval capa-bility is critical for the downstream stages of FFRS, where accurate fragment recall directly influences fine-grained rea-soning quality. 

6.2.3 Evaluation of Overall System 

System Setup. Based on the components described in Sec.5.2, we deploy a full multi-modal fine-grained fragment retrieval system that integrates (i) multi-modal long-dialogue decomposition, (ii) fragment embedding and offline index-ing, (iii) online coarse recall, (iv) fine-grained reasoning with F 2RVLM, and (v) dialogue-level fragment aggregation. The goal is to assess the system’s end-to-end capability in performing accurate and efficient fragment retrieval over large-scale real-world corpora. 

Evaluation Corpus & Deployment. To evaluate the prac-tical performance of the proposed FFRS system, we utilize a real-world multi-modal dialogue corpus from our previ-Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 19              

> Table 11 Retrieval latency comparison between FFRS and a brute-force generative baseline in a large-scale corpus. Model Avg. Latency per Query (s) F2RVLM 720 FFRS 18
> Table 12 Human evaluation of retrieval quality on 100 real user queries. Each criterion is assessed using a five-point Likert scale (1 = very poor, 5 = excellent). Evaluation Criterion Mean Score Std. Dev. Query–Fragment Relevance 4.22 0.41 Dialogue-Level Coverage 4.09 0.47 Overall Retrieval Quality 4.16 0.39

ously constructed WeChat test set. The corpus contains 537 authentic long-form conversations, each with more than 100 utterances on average and covering diverse daily-life and workplace scenarios with rich multi-modal content. The entire system is deployed on 8 ×NVIDIA H20 GPUs (PCIe, 96GB). For each test case, a user-issued query and the full multi-modal corpus are jointly processed by the FFRS pipeline, which retrieves and ranks semantically relevant fragments across all dialogues in the corpus. 

Efficiency Comparison. We compare the retrieval latency of FFRS with a brute-force baseline that applies the gen-erative multi-modal model F 2RVLM directly to the entire corpus, performing inference on each long dialogue one by one without any coarse filtering. It represents the naive but commonly adopted strategy where a generative VLM is ap-plied directly for fragment-level reasoning without retrieval. As summarized in Table 11, FFRS achieves an average end-to-end query latency of only 18 seconds, whereas F 2RVLM requires approximately 720 seconds under the same hardware conditions—yielding a 40 × speedup. These results demon-strate that the proposed two-stage pipeline (coarse retrieval followed by fine-grained reasoning) substantially improves retrieval efficiency in large-scale multi-modal dialogue cor-pora while maintaining strong performance. 

Human Evaluation of Retrieval Quality. Since the WeChat dialogue corpus contains a large number of conversations and user queries are issued freely, it is not feasible to obtain definitive ground-truth fragments for each query. To address this, we conducted a controlled human evaluation to quanti-tatively assess the semantic correctness and coverage of the retrieved fragments. Specifically, we recruited 10 volunteers, each asked to provide 10 real information-seeking queries, resulting in 100 query instances. For each query, FFRS re-turned several semantically relevant fragments from the cor-pus. A trained annotation team then evaluated the retrieval results according to two criteria: (i) Query–Fragment Rele-vance: Whether each retrieved fragment accurately reflects the semantic intent of the user query. (ii) Dialogue-Level Coverage: Whether the retrieved fragments capture the major query-relevant content within the source dialogue. Both criteria were assessed utilizing a five-point Likert scale (1 = very poor, 5 = excellent), with higher scores indicat-ing better performance. The final results are summarized in Table 12. Overall, the proposed system demonstrates strong semantic relevance and satisfactory coverage across diverse real-world queries, indicating that FFRS is capable of reliably returning high-quality fragments that align with user intent. Beyond quantitative metrics, qualitative inspection fur-ther confirms the effectiveness of the proposed system. As illustrated in the qualitative examples provided in the Ap-pendix.D.2, the fragments retrieved by FFRS exhibit clear semantic alignment with user-issued queries, accurately cap-turing both the explicit intent and the underlying contextual cues. These examples highlight that FFRS consistently lo-cates the most relevant portions of long multi-modal con-versations, even when the supporting evidence is dispersed across multiple turns. Taken together, the qualitative findings underscore that FFRS not only achieves substantial efficiency improvements but also preserves high retrieval fidelity across large-scale, real-world multi-modal dialogue corpora. 

7 Conclusion 

This work introduces the task of Fine-grained Fragment Re-trieval (FFR), which targets retrieving semantically coherent multi-turn fragments, including both utterances and images, from long-form multi-modal dialogues. We explore two key settings: FFR within a single dialogue and FFR across a dialogue corpus, reflecting both focused and open-domain re-trieval needs. To address these, we develop tailored solutions, F2RVLM for intra-dialogue retrieval and FFRS for corpus-level retrieval. We also construct the MLDR dataset and a real-world WeChat test set to support this task. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our models, setting a solid foundation for future research on multi-modal dialogue understanding and retrieval. Moreover, the proposed methods show strong potential for integration into real-world multi-modal dialogue systems, enabling more context-aware and user-aligned information access. 

Data Availability Statement 

The datasets generated in this study are publicly avail-able at https://github.com/HanboBizl/FFRS. github.io .20 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was part of Hanbo Bi’s research during his intern-ship at Tencent WXG, under the guidance of Zhiqiang Yuan, and both made equivalent contributions. We also acknowl-edge the use of the publicly available multi-modal dialogue datasets DialogCC (Lee et al., 2024) and MMDialog (Feng et al., 2023). 

References 

Achiam J, Adler S, Agarwal S, Ahmad L, Akkaya I, Aleman FL, Almeida D, Altenschmidt J, Altman S, Anadkat S, et al. (2023) Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv:230308774 Anthropic (2025) Introducing claude sonnet 4.5. 

https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-sonnet-4-5 

Bai S, Chen K, Liu X, Wang J, Ge W, Song S, Dang K, Wang P, Wang S, Tang J, et al. (2025a) Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:250213923 Bai Y, Ji Y, Cao M, Wang J, Ye M (2025b) Chat-based person retrieval via dialogue-refined cross-modal alignment. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion Conference, pp 3952–3962 BehnamGhader P, Adlakha V, Mosbach M, Bahdanau D, Chapados N, Reddy S (2024) Llm2vec: Large language models are secretly powerful text encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:240405961 Bi H, Yuan Z, Jia Z, Zhang J, Li C, Luo P, Deng Y, Duan X, Zhang J (2025) F2rvlm: Boosting fine-grained fragment retrieval for multi-modal long-form dialogue with vision language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:250817714 Bischoff R, Graefe V (2002) Dependable multimodal com-munication and interaction with robotic assistants. In: Pro-ceedings. 11th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, IEEE, pp 300–305 Chaffin A, Lac A (2024) Monoqwen: Visual docu-ment reranking. URL https://huggingface.co/ lightonai/MonoQwen2-VL-v0.1 

Chen X, Song X, Zuo J, Wei Y, Nie L, Chua TS (2024a) Domain-aware multimodal dialog systems with distribution-based user characteristic modeling. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications 21(2):1–22 Chen Y, Fan W, Xing X, Pang J, Huang M, Han W, Tie Q, Xu X (2022) CPED: A large-scale chinese personal-ized and emotional dialogue dataset for conversational ai. arXiv:220514727 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2205.14727 

Chen Z, Wu J, Wang W, Su W, Chen G, Xing S, Zhong M, Zhang Q, Zhu X, Lu L, et al. (2024b) Internvl: Scal-ing up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 24185–24198 Comanici G, Bieber E, Schaekermann M, Pasupat I, Sachdeva N, Dhillon I, Blistein M, Ram O, Zhang D, Rosen E, et al. (2025) Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv:250706261 Feng J, Sun Q, Xu C, Zhao P, Yang Y, Tao C, Zhao D, Lin Q (2023) Mmdialog: A large-scale multi-turn dialogue dataset towards multi-modal open-domain conversation. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 7348–7363 Feng K, Gong K, Li B, Guo Z, Wang Y, Peng T, Wu J, Zhang X, Wang B, Yue X (2025) Video-r1: Reinforcing video reasoning in mllms. arXiv:250321776 G ¨unther M, Sturua S, Akram MK, Mohr I, Ungureanu A, Wang B, Eslami S, Martens S, Werk M, Wang N, et al. (2025) jina-embeddings-v4: Universal embeddings for multimodal multilingual retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Multilingual Representation Learning (MRL 2025), pp 531–550 Guo D, Wu F, Zhu F, Leng F, Shi G, Chen H, Fan H, Wang J, Jiang J, Wang J, et al. (2025a) Seed1. 5-vl technical report. arXiv:250507062 Guo D, Yang D, Zhang H, Song J, Zhang R, Xu R, Zhu Q, Ma S, Wang P, Bi X, et al. (2025b) Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv:250112948 Hu EJ, Shen Y, Wallis P, Allen-Zhu Z, Li Y, Wang S, Wang L, Chen W, et al. (2022) Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR 1(2):3 Huang W, Jia B, Zhai Z, Cao S, Ye Z, Zhao F, Xu Z, Hu Y, Lin S (2025) Vision-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in multimodal large language models. arXiv:250306749 Jaech A, Kalai A, Lerer A, Richardson A, El-Kishky A, Low A, Helyar A, Madry A, Beutel A, Carney A, et al. (2024) Openai o1 system card. arXiv:241216720 Jia C, Yang Y, Xia Y, Chen YT, Parekh Z, Pham H, Le Q, Sung YH, Li Z, Duerig T (2021) Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 4904–4916 Jiang T, Song M, Zhang Z, Huang H, Deng W, Sun F, Zhang Q, Wang D, Zhuang F (2024a) E5-v: Univer-sal embeddings with multimodal large language models. arXiv:240712580 Jiang Z, Meng R, Yang X, Yavuz S, Zhou Y, Chen W (2024b) Vlm2vec: Training vision-language models for massive multimodal embedding tasks. arXiv:241005160 Lee N, Shin S, Choo J, Choi HJ, Myaeng SH (2021) Con-structing multi-modal dialogue dataset by replacing text with semantically relevant images. In: Proceedings of the Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 21 

59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp 897–906 Lee YJ, Ko B, Kim HG, Hyeon J, Choi HJ (2024) Dialogcc: An automated pipeline for creating high-quality multi-modal dialogue dataset. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 1938–1963 Li J, Li D, Savarese S, Hoi S (2023) Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 19730–19742 Lin H, Ruan L, Xia W, Liu P, Wen J, Xu Y, Hu D, Song R, Zhao WX, Jin Q, et al. (2023) Tiktalk: a video-based dialogue dataset for multi-modal chitchat in real world. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp 1303–1313 Lin SC, Lee C, Shoeybi M, Lin J, Catanzaro B, Ping W (2025) Mm-embed: Universal multimodal retrieval with multimodal llms. In: The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations Liu H, Li C, Wu Q, Lee YJ (2023a) Visual instruction tun-ing. Advances in neural information processing systems 36:34892–34916 Liu H, Li C, Wu Q, Lee YJ (2023b) Visual instruction tuning. In: NeurIPS Liu Y, Zhang Y, Cai J, Jiang X, Hu Y, Yao J, Wang Y, Xie W (2025a) Lamra: Large multimodal model as your advanced retrieval assistant. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp 4015–4025 Liu Z, Xiong C, Lv Y, Liu Z, Yu G (2022) Universal vision-language dense retrieval: Learning a unified representation space for multi-modal retrieval. In: The Eleventh Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations Liu Z, Sun Z, Zang Y, Dong X, Cao Y, Duan H, Lin D, Wang J (2025b) Visual-rft: Visual reinforcement fine-tuning. arXiv:250301785 Lu S, Li Y, Chen QG, Xu Z, Luo W, Zhang K, Ye HJ (2024) Ovis: Structural embedding alignment for multimodal large language model. arXiv:240520797 Meng R, Liu Y, Joty SR, Xiong C, Zhou Y, Yavuz S (2024) Sfr-embedding-2: Advanced text embedding with multi-stage training. Last accessed: Nov 24th Meng R, Jiang Z, Liu Y, Su M, Yang X, Fu Y, Qin C, Chen Z, Xu R, Xiong C, et al. (2025) Vlm2vec-v2: Advanc-ing multimodal embedding for videos, images, and visual documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:250704590 Meng Y, Wang S, Han Q, Sun X, Wu F, Yan R, Li J (2020) Openvidial: A large-scale, open-domain dialogue dataset with visual contexts. arXiv:201215015 Mostafazadeh N, Brockett C, Dolan WB, Galley M, Gao J, Spithourakis G, Vanderwende L (2017) Image-grounded conversations: Multimodal context for natural question and response generation. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 462–472 Nie J, Wang Q, Xiong J (2021) Research on intelligent ser-vice of customer service system. Cognitive Computation and Systems 3(3):197–205 Peng Y, Zhang G, Zhang M, You Z, Liu J, Zhu Q, Yang K, Xu X, Geng X, Yang X (2025) Lmm-r1: Empowering 3b lmms with strong reasoning abilities through two-stage rule-based rl. arXiv:250307536 Radford A, Kim JW, Hallacy C, Ramesh A, Goh G, Agarwal S, Sastry G, Askell A, Mishkin P, Clark J, et al. (2021) Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learn-ing, PmLR, pp 8748–8763 Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov O (2017) Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv:170706347 Shao Z, Wang P, Zhu Q, Xu R, Song J, Bi X, Zhang H, Zhang M, Li Y, Wu Y, et al. (2024) Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv:240203300 Shen H, Liu P, Li J, Fang C, Ma Y, Liao J, Shen Q, Zhang Z, Zhao K, Zhang Q, et al. (2025) Vlm-r1: A stable and generalizable r1-style large vision-language model. arXiv:250407615 Shi Y, Otto C, Jain AK (2018) Face clustering: representation and pairwise constraints. IEEE Transactions on Informa-tion Forensics and Security 13(7):1626–1640 Shuster K, Humeau S, Bordes A, Weston J (2020) Image-chat: Engaging grounded conversations. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 2414–2429 Su H, Shi W, Kasai J, Wang Y, Hu Y, Ostendorf M, Yih Wt, Smith NA, Zettlemoyer L, Yu T (2023) One embedder, any task: Instruction-finetuned text embeddings. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp 1102–1121 Tan H, Ji Y, Hao X, Lin M, Wang P, Wang Z, Zhang S (2025) Reason-rft: Reinforcement fine-tuning for visual reasoning. arXiv:250320752 Tomar A, Kakkar A (2014) Maturity model for features of social messaging applications. In: Proceedings of 3rd Inter-national Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization, IEEE, pp 1–6 Walnycky D, Baggili I, Marrington A, Moore J, Breitinger F (2015) Network and device forensic analysis of an-droid social-messaging applications. Digital Investigation 14:S77–S84 22 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Wang H, Qu C, Huang Z, Chu W, Lin F, Chen W (2025) Vl-rethinker: Incentivizing self-reflection of vision-language models with reinforcement learning. arXiv:250408837 Wang L, Yang N, Huang X, Yang L, Majumder R, Wei F (2024a) Improving text embeddings with large language models. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 11897–11916 Wang P, Bai S, Tan S, Wang S, Fan Z, Bai J, Chen K, Liu X, Wang J, Ge W, et al. (2024b) Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv:240912191 Wei C, Chen Y, Chen H, Hu H, Zhang G, Fu J, Ritter A, Chen W (2024) Uniir: Training and benchmarking universal mul-timodal information retrievers. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, pp 387–404 Wu Z, Chen X, Pan Z, Liu X, Liu W, Dai D, Gao H, Ma Y, Wu C, Wang B, et al. (2024a) Deepseek-vl2: Mixture-of-experts vision-language models for advanced multimodal understanding. arXiv:241210302 Wu Z, She Q, Zhou C (2024b) Intelligent customer service system optimization based on artificial intelligence. Jour-nal of Organizational and End User Computing (JOEUC) 36(1):1–27 Xiaomi LCT (2025) Mimo-vl technical report. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2506.03569 , 2506.03569 

Yang A, Li A, Yang B, Zhang B, Hui B, Zheng B, Yu B, Gao C, Huang C, Lv C, et al. (2025a) Qwen3 technical report. arXiv:250509388 Yang Z, Peng T, Gao C, Wang C, Huang H, Deng Y (2025b) A deep dive into retrieval-augmented generation for code completion: Experience on wechat. arXiv preprint arXiv:250718515 Ye J, Xu H, Liu H, Hu A, Yan M, Qian Q, Zhang J, Huang F, Zhou J (2024) mplug-owl3: Towards long image-sequence understanding in multi-modal large language models. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2408.04840 , 2408.04840 

Yin Z, Hui B, Yang M, Huang F, Li Y (2024) Dialclip: Em-powering clip as multi-modal dialog retriever. In: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 12421– 12425 Yu Q, Zhang Z, Zhu R, Yuan Y, Zuo X, Yue Y, Dai W, Fan T, Liu G, Liu L, et al. (2025) Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv:250314476 Yue Y, Yuan Y, Yu Q, Zuo X, Zhu R, Xu W, Chen J, Wang C, Fan T, Du Z, et al. (2025) Vapo: Efficient and reli-able reinforcement learning for advanced reasoning tasks. arXiv:250405118 Zang X, Liu L, Wang M, Song Y, Zhang H, Chen J (2021) Photochat: A human-human dialogue dataset with photo sharing behavior for joint image-text modeling. In: Pro-ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 6142–6152 Zhang X, Zhang Y, Xie W, Li M, Dai Z, Long D, Xie P, Zhang M, Li W, Zhang M (2024) Gme: Improving universal multimodal retrieval by multimodal llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:241216855 Zhang Y, Yu Y, Guo Q, Wang B, Zhao D, Uprety S, Song D, Li Q, Qin J (2023) Cmma: benchmarking multi-affection detection in chinese multi-modal conversations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:18794– 18805 Zhao J, Zhang T, Hu J, Liu Y, Jin Q, Wang X, Li H (2022) M3ed: Multi-modal multi-scene multi-label emotional dia-logue database. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers), pp 5699–5710 Zhao Y, Huang J, Hu J, Wang X, Mao Y, Zhang D, Jiang Z, Wu Z, Ai B, Wang A, Zhou W, Chen Y (2024) Swift:a scalable lightweight infrastructure for fine-tuning. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408. 05517 , 2408.05517 

Zheng Y, Chen G, Liu X, Sun J (2022) Mmchat: Multi-modal chat dataset on social media. In: Proceedings of the Thir-teenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp 5778–5786 Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 23 

A Appendix Overview 

The Supplementary Materials offer additional insights and experimental details that support the main paper. The content is organized as follows: 

– Dataset Construction and Analysis – MLDR Construction: Describes the full pipeline for building the MLDR dataset. 

– WeChat-Based Dataset Construction: Details the data source, annotation protocol, and licensing for the WeChat test set. 

– Dataset Statistics and Analysis: Presents topic bias analysis and representative qualitative examples. 

– Implementation Details – Sliding Window Inference for Long Contexts: Explains in-ference strategies for models that cannot process long dialogues directly under the single-dialogue FFR setting. 

– Metrics of Fragment Boundary Prediction Model: Provides a detailed explanation of the two clustering-based metrics, Pairwise Precision/Recall/F1 and B-cubed Precision/Recall/F1, used to evaluate the fragment boundary prediction model in FFRS for decomposing multi-modal dialogues. 

– Experimental Results and Analysis – Experimental Results in Single-Dialogue FFR: Includes typ-ical qualitative retrieval examples comparing different models, evaluates performance on an English-translated version of the WeChat test set, and defines the coverage, relevance, and con-sistency metrics used in the human evaluation. 

– Qualitative Results of FFRS in Corpus-level FFR: Presents qualitative results of the proposed FFRS system on the WeChat corpus. 

B Dataset Construction and Analysis 

B.1 MLDR Construction 

This section provides detailed elaboration on the key steps involved in the construction of the MLDR dataset. 

Data Cleaning. To ensure high-quality long-form construction, we con-duct a rigorous cleaning process based on four key filtering standards: (i) Image-Text Consistency: We encode visual and textual content uti-lizing CLIP and discard samples with low cross-modal similarity. (ii) Topic Coherence: Sentence embeddings are obtained utilizing BERT, and K-means clustering is applied to filter out dialogues that deviate from a central topic. (iii) Dialogue Turn Structure: Each dialogue must contain at least three turns in a “User1–User2–User1” pattern to ensure basic conversational flow. (iv) Image Quality: We filter out images with resolutions below 500 pixels or with extreme aspect ratios (greater than 7.5), ensuring visual quality. 

Dialogue Triplet Semantic Matching. To generate coherent long-form dialogues from multiple short dialogues, we propose a three-step triplet-based semantic matching strategy. This process ensures both topic continuity and multimodal alignment, and includes the following steps: 1. Trial Screening of Text Semantic: For each cleaned short dialogue 

DA, we first perform textual semantic screening. We encode all textual content (including image captions) using a pretrained BERT model and compute the mean sentence embedding for each dia-logue. Cosine similarity is then calculated between DA’s embed-ding and the embeddings of all other candidate dialogues. Based on this initial similarity score, we select the Top-K (where K = 50 )most semantically relevant dialogues. 2. Refined Screening of Multimodal Semantic: Next, we perform multimodal semantic refinement for the Top-K dialogues selected in the first step. Using CLIP, we separately encode both textual and visual content, calculating the cosine similarity for each modality. These similarities are then combined with weighted scores (i.e., 0.7 for text and 0.3 for image) to obtain the final multimodal similarity score. From this, we select the Top-2 dialogues {D1 

> B

, D 2 

> B

}, based on this refined multimodal score. 3. Triplet Construction: For each selected dialogue DiB (i = 1 , 2), we repeat the above two-stage matching process to retrieve the Top-2 most semantically and multimodally relevant dialogues, denoted as 

{Di, 1 

> C

, D i, 2 

> C

}. This results in 4 distinct triplets: 

DA → DiB → Di,j C , i = 1 , 2; j = 1 , 2 (11) These triplets provide a structural foundation for generating ex-tended dialogues, ensuring both semantic and multimodal coher-ence. Notably, each dialogue DA, DB , and DC in a triplet must be mutually disjoint in terms of both dialogue ID and image con-tent, ensuring that each triplet represents unique and non-duplicate information. 

Long-form Dialogue Generation. To convert semantically aligned triplets into coherent long-form dialogues, we employ the Qwen3 256B (Yang et al., 2025a) large language model under a structured prompt template (Fig.8). The generation process adheres to the fol-lowing principles: (i) Preserve the original multimodal content and semantics while enhancing fluency and readability. (ii) Insert natural transition utterances to ensure coherent topic progression and stylistic consistency across dialogue segments. (iii) Translating all content into fluent and contextually appropriate Chinese, aligned with real-world conversational norms. This process enables the synthesis of high-quality, semantically coherent, and structurally complete Chinese multimodal long-form dialogues, which form the foundation for subsequent retrieval and understanding tasks. 

Multi-Granularity Annotation. To enable fine-grained semantic re-trieval over long-form multimodal dialogues, we design a two-level shared tagging scheme and implement it automatically using a Qwen3 model under structured prompts (see Fig.9). Each sentence and image caption is annotated with (i) a coarse-grained shared tag indicating the high-level domain or scenario (e.g., “banking services”, “travel plan-ning”), and (ii) a fine-grained shared tag specifying the detailed activity within the domain (e.g., “open savings account”). Both types of tags are required to be shared by at least two utterances or image captions to ensure topic consistency. To support high-quality tagging, Qwen3 is guided by explicit rules including tag reuse, topic-aligned grouping, and context-aware alignment across dialogue turns. This automated annota-tion process enables efficient semantic disentanglement and facilitates precise retrieval in complex multimodal conversations. 

B.2 WeChat-Based Dataset Construction 

Data Source and Licensing Statement. The real-domain WeChat test set is constructed from naturally occurring image-text conversations voluntarily contributed by 12 participants. These dialogues are not ex-tracted from any internal WeChat databases, but are shared with explicit informed consent from the contributors for academic research purposes. Prior to inclusion, all conversations were thoroughly anonymized and sanitized, with personal identifiers, sensitive content, and inappropriate language removed to ensure privacy protection and ethical compliance. To support responsible use, the dataset will be released under a research-only license. It is strictly prohibited to use the data for commercial applications, product development, or any non-academic purposes. Ac-cess to the dataset requires agreement to the accompanying license terms. 

Annotation Protocol and Quality Control. To ensure high-quality supervision for real-world fragment retrieval, we recruited 10 trained annotators to label the WeChat test set. Prior to annotation, all anno-tators received standardized training covering task definitions, multi-granularity labeling rules, and edge case handling. Each dialogue was 24 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Table 13 Summary of main multimodal dialogue datasets. Datasets are categorized by modality (audio (a), visual (v), and textual (t)), dialogue type (image/video-grounded vs. image-sharing), source, and language. Our MLDR dataset features significantly longer dialogues and richer topic transitions, better reflecting real-world human communication scenarios.                                                                                                                      

> Datasets Modalites Dialogue Type Dialogue Source Language Dialogues Images Turns Turn/Dialog Topic/Dialog
> ImageChat (Shuster et al., 2020) v, t image-grounded crowdsourcing English 201,779 201,779 400,853 1.98 1.00 OpenViDial (Meng et al., 2020) v, t image-grounded moviesTVs English 1,100,000 1,100,000 1,100,000 1.00 1.00 PhotoChat (Zang et al., 2021) v, t image-sharing crowdsourcing English 11,820 10,479 150,138 12.74 1.00 MMDD (Lee et al., 2021) v, t image-sharing text datasets English 17,679 13,288 187,421 11.56 1.00 MMDialog (Feng et al., 2023) v, t image-sharing social media English 1,079,117 1,556,868 4,920,000 4.56 1.00 DialogCC (Lee et al., 2024) v, t image-sharing text datasets English 83,209 129,802 676,181 8.20 1.00 MMChat (Zheng et al., 2022) v, t image-grounded social media Chinese 120,840 204,320 314,130 2.59 1.00 M3ED (Zhao et al., 2022) a, v, t video-grounded TVs Chinese 990 -9082 9.17 1.00 CPED (Chen et al., 2022) a, v, t video-grounded TVs Chinese 12,000 -133,000 11.08 1.00 CMMA (Zhang et al., 2023) a, v, t video-grounded TVs Chinese 3,000 -21,795 7.27 1.00 TikTalk (Lin et al., 2023) a, v, t video-grounded social media Chinese 367,670 38,703 videos 826,752 2.25 1.00
> Our Dataset v, t image-sharing text datasets Chinese 37,030 194,543 942,414 25.45 3.00

Fig. 8 Prompt Template for Long-form Dialogue Generation. 

independently annotated by all annotators to ensure consistency and comprehensive coverage. Following the initial round, we conducted rigorous quality checks to identify inconsistencies and labeling errors. Annotators were required to revise their annotations based on feedback. This iterative process continued until all annotations passed final valida-tion, resulting in a reliable and well-curated benchmark for evaluating fine-grained multimodal retrieval. 

B.3 Dataset Statistics and Analysis 

Dataset Cases. To illustrate the characteristics of different evaluation scenarios, we present representative cases from both the MLDR and the WeChat test set (as reported in Fig.10-12). The MLDR set contains dialogues with fewer turns and a cleaner structure, while the WeChat test set features long, real-world conversations with many turns and mixed topics, posing greater challenges for retrieval models in maintaining relevance and coherence. 

Topic Distribution Bias in the WeChat Test Set. As illustrated in Fig.3 in the main body, the WeChat test set exhibits a pronounced skew toward Work & Tech topics, which account for nearly 50% of all annotated dialogues. This bias can be primarily attributed to two factors. (i) The dataset is constructed from real-world conversations voluntarily contributed by 12 participants, most of whom are doctoral students or corporate employees. Their daily communication naturally revolves around professional and technical discussions, resulting in a topic distribution that overrepresents work-related content. (ii) In compliance with ethical and privacy considerations, we intentionally filtered out sensitive or highly private conversations (e.g., involving family, personal health, or intimate relationships). This further reduces the proportion of daily-life and emotion-related content. We acknowledge that this topic bias represents a limitation of the current dataset. While it provides valuable insights into real-world retrieval performance under noisy and task-oriented scenarios, it may not fully capture the diversity of open-domain multimodal interactions. In future iterations, we plan to expand the contributor pool to include participants from more diverse demographics and occupations, and to Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 25 

Fig. 9 Prompt Template for Multi-Granularity Annotation. 

adopt privacy-preserving mechanisms (e.g., local anonymization) that allow for the safe inclusion of a wider range of topics. This will support the construction of a more balanced and comprehensive real-domain benchmark. 

C Implementation Details 

C.1 Sliding Window Inference for Long Contexts 

Some open-source MLLMs (e.g., Ovis2-2B, LLaVA-1.5-7B, and InternVL3-series) are constrained by limited context length and can-not directly process long-form dialogues in a single pass. To address this limitation, we adopt a sliding window inference strategy during evaluation. Specifically, the dialogue is segmented into overlapping windows of 35 turns, with an overlap of 15 turns between adjacent win-dows. Each window is independently processed by the model, and the fragment-level predictions are collected. For overlapping segments, we take the union of predicted results across windows to ensure comprehen-sive coverage and mitigate boundary truncation effects. This approach enables fair evaluation of models with limited context capacity while maintaining retrieval completeness. 

C.2 Metrics of Fragment Boundary Prediction Model 

We evaluate the quality of predicted dialogue fragmentations using two clustering-based metrics: Pairwise Precision/Recall/F1 (Shi et al., 2018) 26 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. and B-cubed Precision/Recall/F1 (G ¨unther et al., 2025). Both metrics compute precision, recall, and F1-score, which are harmonic means of precision and recall. The key difference between them lies in the granularity of the evaluation. 

Pairwise Precision/Recall/F1. This metric evaluates the overall con-sistency by considering all possible utterance pairs in the dialogue. Let 

R(i, j ) = 1 if utterances i and j belong to the same ground-truth fragment, and ˆR(i, j ) = 1 if they are predicted to belong to the same fragment. From this, we compute true positives (TP), false positives (FP), and false negatives (FN), and derive the precision, recall, and F1 scores: TP = X

> i<j

[R(i, j ) = 1 ∧ ˆR(i, j ) = 1] 

FP = X

> i<j

[R(i, j ) = 0 ∧ ˆR(i, j ) = 1] 

FN = X

> i<j

[R(i, j ) = 1 ∧ ˆR(i, j ) = 0] 

(12) The final precision, recall, and F1 scores are computed as: Precision pair = TP TP + FP , Recall pair = TP TP + FN F1 pair = 2 · Precision pair · Recall pair 

Precision pair + Recall pair 

(13) 

B-cubed Precision/Recall/F1. This metric measures local consistency for each utterance. Let C(i) and ˆC(i) denote the ground-truth and predicted clusters for utterance i, respectively: 

Pi = |C(i) ∩ ˆC(i)|| ˆC(i)| , Ri = |C(i) ∩ ˆC(i)||C(i)| . (14) The B-cubed precision, recall, and F1 scores are averaged over all utterances in the dialogue: Precision B = 1

N

X

> i

Pi, Recall B = 1

N

X

> i

Ri

F1 B = 2 · Precision B · Recall B

Precision B + Recall B

(15) This metric evaluates local consistency by ensuring that each utterance is correctly grouped with its corresponding cluster, both in ground-truth and predicted groupings. 

D Experimental Results and Analysis 

D.1 Experimental Results in Single-Dialogue FFR 

Comparison of Qualitative Results. We provide qualitative compar-isons on the MLDR validation set and the WeChat test set to illus-trate fragment-level retrieval performance. On the MLDR validation set (Fig.10), our F 2RVLM accurately retrieves semantically complete and coherent fragments that align well with human annotations. It out-performs closed-source or open-source large models that often miss key utterances or include off-topic content. On the WeChat test set (Fig.11–12), our model demonstrates better robustness in informal, multi-topic dialogues. While closed-source and open-source models tend to produce partial or noisy results, F 2RVLM captures more com-plete, relevant, and coherent fragments, effectively combining verbal and visual cues even in complex real-world cases. These results further validate the model’s superior capability in real-world fragment-level retrieval. 

Comparison of Cross-Lingual Generalization. To assess the cross-lingual robustness, we evaluate various VLMs on an English-translated version of the WeChat test set. Specifically, we randomly sample 200 dialogues from the original set and translate each utterance into English using DeepL Translator to preserve semantic fidelity. The translated set maintains the original structure and multimodal content, enabling fair comparison across languages. As depicted in Table 14, even though mod-els like Claude-4 and GPT-4o exhibit strong zero-shot performance due to extensive pre-training on English corpora, our F 2RVLM-7B achieves the highest overall joint F1 (57.49%) and MCC (50.69%). Even the 3B variant of F 2RVLM outperforms larger models like MiMo-7B and Qwen2.5-VL-7B, confirming its strong generalization with fewer pa-rameters. Importantly, unlike some VLMs that exhibit skewed retrieval behavior (e.g., high precision but low recall, or vice versa), F 2RVLM achieves a more balanced trade-off between precision and recall. This balance results in consistently higher F1 and MCC scores, highlighting the model’s ability to perform fine-grained fragment retrieval across languages. The above results suggest that the reward-guided fine-tuning strategy in F 2RVLM effectively transfers to different linguistic set-tings, supporting fine-grained fragment alignment and reasoning beyond Chinese-language contexts. 

Human Subjective Evaluation Criteria. To assess the human-perceived quality of fragment-level retrieval, we randomly sample 200 dialogues and ask expert annotators to compare model outputs under identical input contexts. Each annotator is instructed to select the best-performing model according to the following three criteria: 1. Coverage, which measures whether the retrieved fragment fully captures all key information relevant to the user query. It empha-sizes completeness, particularly the inclusion of essential contex-tual elements. Fragments that contain more content can still receive high coverage scores as long as they thoroughly address the query without omitting important details. 2. Relevance, which evaluates how well the retrieved content seman-tically aligns with the user query. Every utterance and image in the fragment should directly relate to the query’s core intent. Even if some parts are on-topic, the presence of off-topic or irrelevant content will reduce the relevance score. 3. Coherence, which assesses the logical flow and clarity of the re-trieved fragment itself. It focuses on whether the sentences and images are naturally connected, well-organized, and easy to un-derstand when read as a self-contained unit. This evaluation does not consider the broader dialogue context, but strictly the internal consistency of the retrieved segment. If multiple models produce identical and top-performing outputs for a given dialogue, annotators will select all such models. As a result, the total number of top-choice selections may exceed the number of dialogues evaluated. 

D.2 Qualitative Results of FFRS in Corpus-level FFR 

Beyond quantitative metrics, qualitative inspection further confirms the effectiveness of the proposed system. As showcased in our demo 3, the fragments retrieved by FFRS exhibit clear semantic alignment with user-issued queries, accurately capturing both the explicit intent and the underlying contextual cues. These examples highlight that FFRS consistently locates the most relevant portions of long multi-modal conversations, even when the supporting evidence is dispersed across multiple turns. Taken together, the qualitative findings underscore that FFRS not only achieves substantial efficiency improvements but also preserves high retrieval fidelity across large-scale, real-world multi-modal dialogue corpora.  

> 3

https://sprproxy-1258344707.cos.ap-shanghai. myqcloud.com/hanbobi/Pipeline_demo.html Fine-grained Fragment Retrieval in Multi-modal Long-form Dialogues 27 

Table 14 Evaluation results on the English-translated WeChat test set. We report precision, recall, F1, and MCC for utterance, image, and joint retrieval. “ †” indicates zero-shot inference without MLDR fine-tuning. Model Utterance Retrieval Image Retrieval Joint Retrieval Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC Precision Recall F1 MCC Qwen2.5-VL-72B † 30.31 32.04 31.15 21.57 34.23 73.56 46.72 36.60 32.15 44.64 38.94 29.08 Claude-4 † 59.09 39.46 47.32 42.82 59.05 59.62 59.33 51.83 59.07 47.49 53.32 47.32 GPT-4o † 64.18 34.54 44.91 42.23 53.69 62.98 57.96 49.74 58.47 44.61 51.43 45.99 Gemini-2.5 † 59.94 26.56 36.81 35.00 52.25 47.21 49.60 41.13 55.83 33.99 43.20 38.06 mPLUG-Owl3-2B 22.32 16.92 19.25 10.14 16.71 29.81 21.42 5.13 19.11 21.59 20.33 7.64 Qwen2-VL-2B 15.90 86.34 26.86 16.69 27.57 81.25 41.17 30.58 20.17 83.72 34.01 23.64 Qwen2.5-VL-3B 23.78 76.42 36.27 28.87 34.47 72.60 46.75 36.50 28.15 74.46 41.51 32.68 Mimo-7B-RL 37.44 40.92 39.10 30.49 64.75 37.98 47.88 43.04 47.44 39.39 43.49 36.77 Qwen2-VL-7B 38.85 56.66 46.09 38.14 47.47 58.65 52.47 43.00 42.73 57.64 49.28 40.57 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 34.82 63.52 44.98 37.27 44.90 67.79 54.02 44.91 39.22 65.59 49.50 41.09 DeepSeek-VL2-Small-16B 26.43 14.66 18.86 11.97 55.88 9.69 16.52 18.72 35.89 11.67 17.69 15.35 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-2B 17.03 86.27 28.45 19.51 29.80 78.37 43.18 32.78 21.68 82.13 35.81 26.14 

F2RVLM-Qwen2.5-VL-3B 30.25 70.18 42.28 35.00 42.11 73.08 53.43 44.60 35.21 71.60 47.85 39.80 

F2RVLM-Qwen2-VL-7B 50.19 53.81 51.94 45.23 62.15 63.94 63.03 56.15 55.54 58.44 57.49 50.69 

Fig. 10 Qualitative comparison on the MLDR validation set. Given a user query, we visualize one representative case of retrieved fragments from various models. Pre-trained models often retrieve semantically relevant but incomplete or disjointed fragments. MLDR fine-tuned models improve alignment but may still miss contextual boundaries. Our F 2RVLM-7B achieves the most coherent and complete retrieval, accurately aligning both utterances and images with the intended semantics. 28 Hanbo Bi 1,2⋆ et al. 

Fig. 11 Case 1 of qualitative comparison on the WeChat test set, focusing on a personal-life dialogue scenario. 

Fig. 12 Case 2 of qualitative comparison on the WeChat test set, illustrating fragment retrieval in a technical-support dialogue scenario.